Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure 9 1 INTRODUCTION 
Municipalities have a Constitutional responsibility for providing sustainable and viable 
water services to the communities within their areas of jurisdiction. 
The purpose of these guidelines is to assist municipalities undertake the development of 
water and sanitation infrastructure, with a focus on the design aspects of development.  
Further guidelines are in the process of being developed for Water Services Development 
Plans, social aspects and operation and maintenance of water services projects. 
1.1 Purpose of guidelines 
It is important to note that these guidelines: 
ARE MERELY INTENDED TO GIVE GUIDANCE TO MUNICIPAL
OFFICIALS, PLANNERS AND DESIGNERS.
Are not intended to replace professional expertise and engineering judgement.
Provide overarching guidance and cannot be used as a replacement for
specifications.
Must be used together with recognised standards, codes, and acts such as those of
the South African Bureau of Standards (SANS Codes), the Water Services Act,
the National Water Act, and the Occupational Health and Safety Act.
These guidelines are made available through two media: 
A CD has been distributed which contains this document as well as a number of
useful folders. The contents of the folders are listed at the end of this document.
A downloadable version of the document is also accessible from the web page of
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. The DWAF web page also
contains the same folders that are included on the CD.Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   10 
  
1.2 Definitions of minimum norms and standards  
 
The aim of Water Services projects funded out of government grants is primarily to 
provide a basic level of water services.  
 
Section 6 of the “Strategic Frame work for Water Services” provides the  minimum 
technical norms and standards for water services. The Strategic Framework is included in 
the Legislation and Policy Folder . 
 
The following definitions and minimum standards are given in the Strategic Framework:  
 
Basic water supply facility  is: 
The infrastructure necessary to supply 25 litres of potable water per person per day 
supplied within 200 metres of a household and with a minimum flow of 10 litres per 
minute (in the case of communal water points) or 6 000  litres of potable water supplied 
per formal connection per month (in the case of yard or house connections).  
 
Basic water supply service  is: 
The provision of a basic water supply facility, the sustainable operation of the facility 
(available for at least 350 days per year and not interrupted for more than 48 consecutive 
hours per incident) and the communication of good water -use, hygiene and related 
practices.  
 
Basic sanitation facility  is: 
The infrastructure necessary to provide a sanitation facility whic h is safe, reliable, 
private, protected from the weather and ventilated, keeps smells to the minimum, is easy 
to keep clean, minimises the risk of the spread of sanitation -related diseases by 
facilitating the appropriate control of disease carrying flies a nd pests, and enables safe 
and appropriate treatment and/or removal of human waste and wastewater in an 
environmentally sound manner.  
 
Basic sanitation service  is: 
The provision of a basic sanitation facility which is easily accessible to a household, the 
sustainable operation of the facility, including the safe removal of human waste and 
wastewater from the premises where this is appropriate and necessary, and the 
communication of good sanitation, hygiene and related practices.  
 
Potable water quality  is: 
Water supplied by water services providers intended to be used for drinking or domestic 
purposes (potable water) must be of a quality consistent with SANS 241 (Specifications 
for Drinking Water), as may be amended from time to time.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure 11 Metering and flow control : 
All unrestricted water connections must be metered or controlled to a basic level. Where 
appropriate, water services providers should consider the benefits of offering households 
controlled flow connections (for example, yard tanks) that can provide a basic supply of 
water cost-effectively. Where pre-payment meters are installed, these must take into 
account the free basic water services policy and allow for access to a basic amount of 
water at zero tariff. 
Eradication of bucket toilets: 
The bucket system is an unsuitable and inappropriate level of service. All water services 
authorities must identify and implement programmes for the eradication of all bucket 
systems by 2006. 
1.3 Project development life cycle 
A typical project development life cycle consists of the following phases: 
Establishment of institutional arrangements 
The designated municipality is the water services authority and is responsible for water 
services provision. The water services authority either contracts with a water services 
provider or fulfils that function itself. 
Planning phase 
The municipality: 
prepares a Water Services Development Plan (WSDP) as part of its Integrated
Development Plan (IDP) for the area of jurisdiction of the Water Services
Authority (WSA);
undertakes Feasibility Studies for each water or sanitation project identified in the
WSDP.
DWAF integrates all WSDPs into a National Reference Framework. 
Design phase 
The municipality procures the design consultant who designs the works and prepares the 
tender documentation or the municipality does it in house. 
Tender stage 
Advertising, site inspection, adjudication of tenders received and award of contract. Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   12 
 Construction phase  
 
Execution of the works in accordance with the tender documentation under supervision  
 
Operations and maintenance  
 
The Water Services Provider operates and maintains the works (with or without the 
assistance of contractors) and collects the revenue.  
 
The Water Services Authority (WSA) monitors the Water Services Provider (WSP) and 
manages t he contract that it has with the WSP.  
 
The WSA undertakes an annual water services audit and reports to DWAF who performs 
the function of Regulator.  
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   13 
  
2 LEGISLATION AND POLI CY 
 
 
A number of important statutes and policy documents govern the development and  
operation of community water supply schemes. Legislation affects all phases of 
development, and for example stipulates requirements for taking water from the resource, 
for the planning of water services, how to determine institutional arrangements, and th e 
requirements for financial and other reporting.  
 
The most important legislation and policy documents governing the development and 
operation of water services are:  
 Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act 108 of 1996)  
 Water Services Act, 1 997 (Act 108 of 1997)  
 National Water Act, 1998 (Act 36 of 1998)  
 Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act 32 of 2000)  
 Municipal Structures Act, 2000 (Act 33 of 2000)  
 Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act 1 of 1999)  
 Local Government Municipal Finance Management A ct, 2003 (Act 56 of 2003)  
 Division of Revenue Act -Enacted Annually  
 Strategic Framework for Water Services, September 2003  
 White Paper on Sanitation, September 2001  
 Regulations under S9 of the Water Services Act, 1997  
 Regulations under S10 of the Water Ser vices Act, 1997  
 Regulations under S 19 of the Water Services Act, 1997  
 Model Water Services Bylaws. Section 21(1) of the Water Services Act, 1997  
 Guidelines For Human Settlements Planning and Design (Red Book). Obtainable 
from the CSIR.  
 
The full text of t hese documents, with the exception of the Red Book, are included in the 
Legislation and Policy folder  of the guidelines CD. Most of these documents must be 
read with Acrobat Reader which is available on the Web  
 
Specific sections of these documents will al so be highlighted in the different sections of 
the Guidelines.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   14 
  
3 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANG EMENTS  
 
 
3.1 Introduction  
 
The following institutions are responsible for the supply of water and sanitation services:  
 The Water Services Authority;  
 The Water Services Provide r (Sometimes a Water Board or bulk water provider); 
and 
 The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry as regulator.  
 
Other National Government Departments also fulfil important roles. For example DPLG 
manages the Municipal Infrastructure Grant and the Equit able Share and the Department 
of Health has an important function regarding health and hygiene and sanitation.  
 
A Water Services Authority (WSA) is the municipality that has been designated 
responsibility for ensuring access to water services. The WSA is b oth the owner of the 
works and is the elected representative of the customers.  
 
A water services provider (WSP) is the person or organization that actually provides 
water services to consumers or to another water services institution. The WSA can either 
appoint a WSP, for example another municipality, a water board or a private contractor, 
or can fulfil the function itself.  
 
3.2 Deciding on and contracting with a water services provider  
 
The WSA should follow the procedure set out in S78 of the Municipal System s Act when 
deciding whether it should fulfil the WSP function itself or whether it should contract 
with a separate WSP. A model Terms of Reference for a S78 Assessment has been 
developed by the Municipal Infrastructure Unit (MIU) which is associated with D BSA. 
This model Terms of Reference is included in the Institutional Folder.  
 
S19 of the Water Services Act sets out requirements that must be complied with when a 
WSA contracts with a WSP. The Minister has promulgated regulations under S19 of the 
Water Ser vices Act which sets out the minimum requirements with which a contract 
between a WSA and a WSP must comply. These regulations are included in the 
Legislation and Policy Folder . 
 
Even if the WSA fulfils the WSP function itself, it should account separately  for water 
services, i.e. it should:  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   15 
  keep separate financial accounts of how much was spent on or invested in water 
services during each financial year;  
 the revenue it received from the sale of water services;  
 funds received from National Government and o ther sources that were allocated 
to water services etc.  
 
Water Services includes both water supply and sanitation services.  
 
3.3 Bylaws and other requirements  
 
S21 of the Water Services Act requires that WSAs must make bylaws which contain 
conditions for water  services. Model Bylaws that comply with the requirements of S21 of 
the Water Services Act are included in the Legislative and Policy Folder . 
 
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   16 
  
4 PLANNING  
 
 
4.1 Introduction  
 
Water and sanitation projects are essentially planned at three levels:  
 At the nation al level the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) 
maintains a national reference framework;  
 At a municipal level each Water Services Authority (WSA) compiles and 
regularly updates a Water Services Development Plan (WSDP); and  
 At a project level each WSA undertakes a feasibility study for each project and 
compiles a technical report.  
 
This hierarchy of plans are discussed below:  
 
4.2 National reference plan  
 
The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is required to comment on the Water 
Services Deve lopment Plans (WSDP) of each WSA and to ensure that all current and 
projected activities are compatible with the national strategies.  To enable a common 
framework for assessing WSDPs, a National Reference Plan is being developed which 
will capture the ess ence of each WSDP in one common structure that relates water 
services planning to the National Water Resource Strategy, Catchment Management 
Strategies (together with water allocations and licensing), Provincial Strategies and IDPs.  
 
The reference framewor k will cover the following topics:  
 General (Locality map and Demographics);  
 Physical & Socio -Economic Development;  
 Water resource availability, allocation and licensing;  
 Service Level Development;  
 Water Resource Development;  
 Water Conservation & Demand Man agement;  
 Water Services Infrastructure;  
 Water Services Authority Institutional Arrangement;  
 Customer Services;  
 Financial Profile; and  
 Project Development.  
 
Municipalities will need to cross reference their plans to the National Reference 
Framework in order  to integrate their own planning with other developments being 
undertaken in surrounding areas.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   17 
  
4.3 Water services development plan  
 
Sections 12 to 18 of the Water Services Act, 1997 requires a Water Services Authority to 
prepare a Water Services Development  Plan. These sections describe how to develop and 
adopt a WSDP and sets out the contents of the WSDP.  
 
The Water Services Act, 1997 is included in the Legislation and Policy Folder . 
 
Whilst the WSDP is a legal requirement, the real value of preparing a WSD P lies in the 
development of a plan whereby the key municipal water services targets are set for a five 
year period.  
 
The WSDP forms a subset of, and must be aligned to, the municipality’s Integrated 
Development Plan (IDP).  
 
The Department of Water Affair s and Forestry has prepared a set of Guidelines for 
preparing a WSDP.  These Guidelines provide basic information about the WSDP, as 
well as specific information on how to prepare the WSDP.  
 
The DWAF WSDP guidelines are included in the Planning Folder . 
 
4.4 Feasibility studies and technical reports  
 
The aim of Water Services projects funded by municipalities out of government grants is 
primarily to provide a basic level of services to the poorer residents of the municipality.  
 
Previously, project level business  plans were compiled by municipalities for purposes of 
project approval and allocation of funds by national government. Under the Municipal 
Infrastructure Grant (MIG) it is no longer necessary for municipalities to submit business 
plans to National Governm ent for approval. However municipalities are still required to 
plan for projects (feasibility studies) and to submit a Water Services Project Technical 
Report to the appropriate DWAF Office for recommendation before releasing funds for 
water services proje cts. It is recommended that the same approach be followed for all 
Water Services projects.  
 
Essentially the Water Services Project Technical Report (Technical Report) comprises a 
description of the following elements of the project:  
 Population  
 Water consum ption  
 Existing works  
 Water source  
 Proposed works  
 Supply pipelines and pump systems  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   18 
  Service reservoirs  
 Water purification works  
 Distribution network  
 Estimated cost of integral parts  
 Unit cost of water  
 Viability, acceptability and sustainability of propos ed project  
 Legal requirements  
 
The format of the “Water Services Project Technical Report” is shown in the table below:  
 
FORMAT OF WATER SERVICES PROJECT TECHNICAL REPORT  
1.1 Introduction  (a) Name the engineering reports from which 
the report was compiled.  Relevant letters or 
notes should be enclosed.  
 
(b) General  
 
A good concise description of the location 
of the local community or supply area 
based on its geographical location and 
main routes serving the area.  The socio -
economic activities of the communi ty with 
much emphasis on the development 
prospects that can be realistically expected 
of the area as well as the climatic factors 
and their influence on the water 
consumption.  
 
(c) General nature and extent of the problem 
with regard to the water supply.  
 
1.2 Existing works  A concise description of the existing works in 
which the relevant storage capacities, yield 
capacities, distances and heights are reflected and 
preferably it should be further illustrated by means 
of a site map or a diagrammatic sketch plan.  In 
respect of the particular component of the works 
that has to be improved, more detail should be 
included, whereas more general detail on the 
remaining elements will suffice although the extent, 
condition and effectiveness thereof should be 
indica ted. 
 
Briefly, the extent of the works is as follows:  
1.2.1  Existing Water 
source  (a) From own sources, e.g. boreholes, 
reservoirs and/or abstraction from public Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   19 
 streams.  
 
General detail, relative location, method of 
abstraction or supply, existing yield 
capacity, water rights, etc.  
 
(b) From other sources, e.g. Government water 
works, common works, or supply by water 
boards.  
 
1.2.2  Existing Supply 
pipelines and 
pump systems  A general description, diameter, length and yield 
capacity of pipelines and pump units and, where 
applicable, number of pump units, pump heads, etc.  
1.2.3  Existing Service 
reservoirs  Location, volume, condition and expected useful 
life and adequacy.  
1.2.4  Existing Water 
purification 
works  General dimensions, type of treatment, yield 
capacity and adequacy.  
1.2.5  Existing 
Distribution 
network   General dimensions, condition and 
adequacy.   
 Is total use being metered?   
 Is every point of supply equipped with a 
meter?   
 Is the bulk supply to the different 
communities being metered?   
 How i s water supplied to the different 
communities?   
 Stand -up taps or indoors?   
 Is there a water -borne sewerage system in 
these communities?   
 Are such improvements being planned for 
the future and, if so, for when?   
 How much is the unaccounted water?  
1.3 Population  An estimate of the population growth over the next 
25 years in stages of five years, showing the 
population to be provided out of the existing works 
and the population to be provided out of the 
proposed works.  This estimate should be 
approached cautiously taking into account all 
pertinent factors, in comparison with the historical 
growth and accompanying socio -economic 
circumstances.  Unless there are specific 
circumstances demanding elucidation, any estimate 
of the population growth is assumed t o link up with 
the available census information.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   20 
 Where available the official information for the past 
25 years for the supply area of the water scheme 
should be provided.  If the supply area varies from 
the census area or if the census returns do not 
correspond with the area's own surveys, the latter 
figures should also be provided.  If no figures are 
available a judicial estimate should be made of the 
present population, based on known items such as 
number of houses, etc.  
1.4 Water 
consumption  The condi tions and particulars of the water 
consumption over at least the preceding five years 
should be provided.  In some areas records covering 
longer periods are available and it is useful to 
provide this information in such instances.  The 
projection of the ex pected water needs should be 
compiled from various parameters that have an 
effect on the water consumption, e.g.:  
 
(a) Historical water consumption;  
(b) the unit consumption;  
(c) population projection;  
(d) water consumption of the business centre;  
(e) water consum ption of the industrial area;  
(f) schools, hostels, old age homes, army 
complex, etc.;  
(g) municipal consumption, e.g. irrigation of 
sports grounds, parks, etc.;  
(h) unmetered use;  
(i) losses.  If the losses in a system are higher 
than say 10%, an accurate  loss analysis 
ought to be done on the system; and  
(j) climatic factors.  
 
In item (b) attention should also be given to the 
expected increase in unit consumption taking place 
as a result of the improvement in living standards.  
 
The estimates of the future water needs should be 
calculated in stages of five years over the next 25 
years, and where applicable the expected peak 
consumption should also be shown.  An example of 
a table that can be used in calculating the projected 
future water consumptions is give n below.  
1.5 Water source  A general description of the source, in addition to 
the description given in paragraph 1.2.1 above, 
indicating the adequacy of the source to meet the Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   21 
 expected future water consumption.  If the source is 
a storage dam or if one is  being developed, the 
basic data of the dam should be furnished, i.e. the 
assured yield, mean annual runoff, size of 
catchment area and storage capacity of the dam 
basin.  If available, information on the silting up 
should be included.  In respect of boreh oles the 
dependable yield of the various sources should be 
provided and for existing boreholes their 
performance during dry periods should be 
mentioned.  
 
Where water sources are shared with other 
consumers, the apportionment, water rights, 
agreements, perm its, water court orders, servitudes, 
tariffs, etc. should be fully set out.  
 
Where the water source is being further developed, 
proper hydrological and/or geohydrological reports 
should be compiled.  For new schemes the 
necessary permits, water court order s, servitudes 
etc. should be obtained.  
 
The quality of the water should be given as well as 
any process that will be used to treat the water 
should be commented on.  
1.6 Proposed works  In the introductory paragraph a concise explanation 
should be given of the reasons for deciding on the 
water scheme or works in question.  Where 
applicable it should be done on the basis of 
information obtained from an economic study or 
evaluation of alternatives weighed up against each 
other.  The reader should be convinced that the 
proposed works represent the most favourable 
alternative and that works must indeed now be 
constructed.  Further phases (say for the next 10 to 
20 years) should be stated briefly so that a complete 
view of the future planning may be formed.  
 
Furth er, the individual components of the scheme 
should be described to provide at least the 
following information:  
 
(i) Description and dimensions:  
Volume, yield capacity, diameter, 
length, pumping head, pump yield Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   22 
 capacity, pump drive requirement.  
 
(ii) Serviceability of proposed 
components in respect of the 
required rendering of service, i.e. to 
what extent future demands will be 
met. 
 
(iii) In respect of water feeder systems 
the peak capacities of the feeder 
pipes and water purification works 
should be ment ioned.  As regards 
distribution systems the maximum 
and minimum pressures in the 
network during zero and peak 
consumption should be furnished.  
1.7 Integral parts 
and estimated 
cost In this paragraph the engineer should give a capital 
cost estimate of the proposed scheme as accurately 
as possible.  The term "integral parts" relates to 
those components of the scheme that can function 
independently, e.g. pipelines, pumping station, 
reservoirs, purification works, powerlines, dams, 
pressure towers, etc.  
1.8 Operation and 
maintenance 
arrangement  It is important that arrangements for the operation 
and management of the works are dealt with before 
the project is completed. The designer of the project 
should provide the operating authority with an 
operating manual , in advance, in order for it to train 
or appoint qualified personnel to operate and 
maintain the project . 
1.9 Viability  Calculations to show that the operations and 
maintenance are financially sustainable through a 
mix of tariff revenue and equitable sha re and other 
allocations.  
1.10 Legal 
Requirements  Legal requirements that need to be complied with 
including water use licensing and Environmental 
Impact Assessments.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   23 
  
 Example of a table for cost estimation:  
 
ITEM  DESCRIPTION  COST (R)  
1. Concrete res ervoir 1 000 m3 ....................................  
2. Pumping station  ....................................  
2.1 Pumping gear 2 x 55 kW x 35 l/s @ 65 
m ....................................  
2.2 Pump house (50 m2) ....................................  
2.3 Electricity supply KVA x L meter  ....................................  
3. Main supply pipeline (35 l/s)  ....................................  
3.1 8 000 m x 250 mm dia  ....................................  
3.2 4 000 m x 200 mm dia  ......................... ...........  
 Subtotal  __________________  
 10% contingencies  ....................................  
 Professional fees and supervision  ....................................  
 Subtotal   
 Total estimated cost  __________________  
 VAT  ........................ ............  
 Total cost of scheme  __________________  
 
2. UNIT COST OF WATER  
 
 The total annual expenditure on completed scheme must be calculated in 
terms of the present cost.  
 
 An example on calculating the unit cost is given below.  
 
EXAMPLE OF A TABLE  THAT CAN BE USED IN CALCULATING THE 
PROJECTED FUTURE WATER CONSUMPTION  
 
YEAR  HOUSEHOLD  INDUS -
TRIAL  INSTITUTION 
SCHOOLS 
HOSP. ECT.  MUNICIPAL 
AND 
LOSSES  TOTAL 
CONSUMPTION  AVERAGE 
DAILY 
PEAK 
DEMAND  GROWTH 
RATE  
 NUMBER  AVERAGE 
DAILY 
CONSUMPTION  
    DAY  YEAR    
  1/c m3//d m3/d m3/d m3/d m3/d m3/d m3/d %/a 
           
           
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   24 
  
A. PRECEDING WATER CONSUMPTION (A record of at least the preceding 
5 years ought to be provided.)  
 
 The actual annual water consumption for the previous 5 years should be 
shown to  provide an indication of the historical growth rate.  Sometimes these 
particulars are simply not available.  A grouping of available data of actual 
water consumption according to group consumption and the determination of 
actual unit consumption of the va rious population groups, present the 
possibility to do more accurate projections of future water consumption.  If 
bulk water meters are not available, summation of sales can be integrated 
with the general monthly bookkeeping.  With modern accounting equipm ent 
it can probably be readily integrated.  
 
B. PROJECTION OF FUTURE WATER CONSUMPTION  
 
The method of calculation and assumptions on expected consumption should 
be motivated and should be compatible with the WSDP.  The Departmental 
standards indicate the mi nimum standard to which consumption for 
institutions, etc., should be added.  Some estimates assume larger unit 
consumptions per capita, whether as a result of gardening, high living 
standards, climatic conditions or because a separate estimate is not incl uded 
for schools, hospitals and businesses etc.  
 
The format of this example allows for gradual adjustment of unit 
consumption which mainly applies where improved services and exalted 
living standards eg. as a result of future indoors water supply and sewer age.  
Rainfall and climate information, nature of population composition and the 
economic activities  (e.g. wet industries) of the community therefore should 
be elucidated in the report.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   25 
  
EXAMPLE OF A TABLE TO CALCULATE THE ANNUAL COST:  
 
ITEM  DESCRIPTION  COST (R)  
1. Interest and redemption   
1.1 Existing works   
1.2 Proposed works  
R x A% p.a. for 25 years   
2. Maintenance cost   
2.1    Existing works   
2.2    Proposed works   
2.2.1     4% on mechanical equipment to the value 
of  
2.2.2     1% on pipelines and powerlines to the 
value of   
2.2.3     0,5% on civil works to the value of   
3. Electricity cost E kWh @ B c/kWh   
4. Chemicals Z m3 @ C c/m3   
5. Salaries and wages of operating staff 
required i.t.o. section 12A of the Water Act   
6. Administrative cos ts @ RD per point of 
connection   
   
 TOTAL ANNUAL COST   
 Based on the estimated annual water 
consumption the unit of water is  x c/m3  
 
NOTES:  
(A)  Interest rate at time of application for funds.  
(B)  Cost of electricity per unit.  
(C)  Cost of chemicals  per m3 (kl).  
(D)  The actual estimated administrative cost.  
(E)  Total units estimated to be used.  
(Z)  Estimated water consumption plus losses.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   26 
  
5 DESIGN CRITERIA  
 
5.1 Introduction  
 
These planning/design criteria have been determined to provide a basic level  of 
water supply with some provision has been made for the future upgrading of the 
supply to higher levels of service. For higher levels of service the Red Book should 
be used.  
 
Not withstanding the guidelines given in this document, the professional respo nsibility 
for selecting appropriate planning/design criteria for the specific circumstances remains 
with the planner or design engineer.  
 
5.2 Summary of design and planning criteria  
 
Recommended planning/design criteria are summarised in the following table:  
 
GENERAL SUMMARY OF BASIC PLANNING AND DESIGN CRITERIA  
1 Design Horizon:  10 Years from commissioning for pipelines and 
reticulation.  
5 - 10 years for all above ground civil works and 
mechanical and electrical equipment.  
2 Population:  For Design Horizon as above.  
3 House occupancy:  6 persons (unless evidence exists to prove 
otherwise).  
4 Growth Rate:  
(up to Design Horizon)  As projected in WSDP or otherwise proved. Could 
be as low as 0% in some areas.  
5 Design Water Usage:  60 lcd for all infrastructure com ponents  
 
In cases of restricted groundwater sources, a 
minimum water usage of 25 lcd is acceptable for 
pumps, pumping mains and elevated tanks only. 
Even in cases of restricted groundwater sources 
reticulation is to be designed for 60 lcd.  
 
6 Design Loss Factors (LF):   i) Water treatment works, LF w = 10%  
ii) Total conveyance losses, LF r = 10%  
 
7 Gross Average Annual Daily 
Demand (GAADD):  GAADD = (1 + LF r) * AADD  
8 Summer Peak Factor:  SPF = 1,2 minimum to 1,5 maximum  
9 Summer Daily Demand, WATER 
TREATMEN T WORKS AND SDD ww = SPF * GAADD * (1 + LF w) 
Design Pumping Period = 20 hrs/day  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   27 
 RAW WATER AND CLEAN 
WATER PUMPS,  (SDD ww): 
10 Summer Daily Demand, BULK 
SUPPLY PIPELINES, (SDD pl): SDD pl = SPF * GAADD  
11 Summer Daily Demand, 
BOREHOLE PUMPS , (SDD pu) SDD pu = SPF * GAADD  
Design Pumping Period – See below  
12 Storage Reservoirs:  
(Total Storage, i.e. Regional and 
Village Reservoirs combined, but 
excluding elevated tank volume)  48 Hrs * AADD Pumped from One Source  
36 Hrs * AADD Pumped from Multiple Sources  
24 Hrs *  AADD Gravity Source  
 
Recommended to split volumes roughly equal 
between Regional and Village storage’s for new 
reservoirs.  
 
A maximum of 24 hours and a minimum of 16 hours 
is required at Village storage.  
 
Reinforced concrete structures only acceptable.  
 
Exceptions apply for a groundwater source supply 
where a ground level storage is inappropriate.  In this 
case an elevated tank with 16hrs (for 2 or more 
powered borehole pumps) to 24hrs * AADD (one 
powered pump only) for 25 lcd is acceptable . 
13 Elevated Tank/Tower:  
(Only required to provide 
reticulation pressures)  4 Hrs * AADD (only for area to be served by tank)  
 
Max. 6 x 10 kl for polyethylene tanks on stands.  
From 75 kl and greater size use pressed sectional 
steel tanks on stand.  
14 Design for pipeli ne flow between 
Main Storage and Elevated Tank:  2 * GAADD  (Gravity)  
2 * GAADD  (Pumped:  20hrs/day)  
15 Design Peak Factor (for 
Reticulations):  DPF = 2 to 3  
16 Design Peak Flow Rate (DPFR 
for Reticulation):  DPFR = DPF * GAADD  
 
Primary reticulation designed  to supply 60 lcd for all 
erven, but only standpipes and existing erf 
connections to be provided against project costs.  
New erf connection piping to be paid for by the new 
consumer.  
 
 
17 Standpipe design:  Flow Rate  DPFR divided by No. of standpipes, sub ject to a 
minimum of 10 1/min (0,17l/s) per tap  
 
Note:  Standpipe with two taps – flow rate 20 l/min  
18 Standpipe design:  Spacing  Each household must be within a 200m radius of a 
Standpipe  
 
Note:  Additional standpipes should be provided if a Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   28 
 physical ba rrier, such as a river, main highway, 
railway or long housing block unduly lengthens the 
walking distance to standpipes.  
19 Residual Pressures (above GL):  10 m minimum at point of delivery, where possible.  
 
Flow limiters must be installed on stand pipes w hen 
Residual Pressure are greater than 25 m above GL . 
 
5.3 Water availability  
 
A common cause of scheme failure is the overestimation of the availability of water. Care 
must be taken that the underlying assumptions of water source availability are proven, 
especially in the case of ground water and where river abstraction is not controlled by 
significant upstream storage.  
 
5.4 Power availability and alternative pump drives  
 
It is also important that the availability of a power supply for the project is properly 
investigated. Installation of long power lines may prove to be very expensive. Dedicated 
transformer supply points are preferred.  
 
In some instances an economic Eskom power supply may not be available, in which case 
alternative power sources for driving pumps  must be considered. There are many factors 
to be considered in these instances and it will be up to the engineer to investigate these 
factors. Some of the factors to be considered are:  
 Amount of power required.  
 Can this be provided by solar means - usuall y for small power requirements.  
 Can the pumps be directly driven by a diesel engine.  
 Can a diesel generator be provided in anticipation of later conversion to Eskom 
power supply.  
 Are facilities for operation and maintenance of diesel engines available,  
 The comparable cost of each solution.  
 
5.5 Guidelines for economic optimisation of pump - pipeline sizing  
 
Two or three of the preferred layouts should be compared in terms of cost, technical 
feasibility, economic viability, social and environmental impacts.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   29 
  
5.5.1 Economic analyses  
 
At the preliminary design stage, economic analyses will normally only be undertaken for 
surface water pumping mains. The purpose is to optimise the pump and pipeline sizes by 
comparing the net present value of alternative configurations.  
 
These analyses are not usually relevant for small village pumping mains from localised 
boreholes.  
 
Usually the analysis compares net present values over a planning horizon of 30 years.  
 
The recommended criteria to be used for economic analysis of water su pply infrastructure 
are as follows:  
 
(i) Infrastructure Lifetime:  
 
  Small pumps and motors   15 years  
  Electric installation    15 years  
  Structures and buildings   30 years  
  Pipelines     30 years  
 
(ii) Power Costs:   Eskom Tariff A  
 
(iii) Operation and Ma intenance Costs:  
 
 Pump station:   0,5 % per annum (p.a.) of total pipeline costs  
    0,25 % p.a. of pump station civil costs  
    4 % p.a. of pump station mechanical and electrical costs  
 
 Pipeline:   0,5 % p.a. of total costs  
 
 Civil Works:   0.25 % p.a. of total costs  
 
(iv) Discount Rates:  
 
 8% p.a. or the official Government discount rate as revised from time to time (but 
sensitivity analysis also done to test for 6 % and 10 %)  
 
5.5.2 Pump and pipe sizing for small borehole schemes  
 
In most cases the boreholes fo r small schemes have yields of less then 5l/sec and only 
require a pumping main of one to two kilometres to the village storage or reticulation.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   30 
 Typically, pipe diameters are less than 100mm.  Pumps for borehole schemes are also 
usually small, typically l ess than 10 kW.  
 
Sizing of pipes, and therefore pumps, can normally be made using simple engineering 
calculations without the need for undertaking optimisation analyses.  
 
Simple guidelines for this type of scheme are:  
 
(i) Pipeline velocities of between 0, 8 and 1,0 m/s generally result in optimised pump 
and pipeline size.  
 
(ii) For diesel engine powered pumps the optimum pump and pipeline should be 
governed by the option with the lowest recurrent diesel fuel consumption.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   31 
  
6 DESIGN REPORT, DRAWI NGS AND 
SPECIF ICATIONS  
 
6.1 Introduction  
 
This section deals with the design report and the design drawings.  
 
A typical water supply scheme comprises the following components:  
 
 A source, which could be boreholes or a dam or a weir;  
 A water treatment plans;  
 A pumps station;  
 Pipelines;  
 Reservoirs; and  
 Consumer connections.  
 
The design of all of these components are discussed in following sections.  
 
A section has also been included on VIP Pit Latrines.  
 
6.2 Design report  
 
Design reports should generally contain the following infor mation:  
 
 Cover page (Region/Province’s name, District Council/Water Services Authority, 
Consultant’s name, Scheme name, CWSS No. Locality number, File No., Date, 
and report's status, i.e. draft 1, draft 2 etc.).  
 Index/Contents page.  
 Executive summary.  
 Desc ription of the project. Refer to locality and scheme layout plans, preferably in 
A3 size.  
 Historical background – for existing supply.  
 Statistical data.  
 Design philosophy.  
 Water source - to be correctly and thoroughly described as described below.  
 Design a ssumptions.  
 Sizing of components/infrastructure (litres per second or m3) - clearly indicate 
how sized. Peak factors should be motivated.  
 Discussion of alternatives and choice of preferred solution.  
 Design standards – SANS, BS, etc. standards used to desig n each component.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   32 
  Special problems and their solution.  
 Methods of analysis.  
 Geology.  
 Foundation treatment.  
 Diversion.  
 Instrumentation/ Scheme’s control system.  
 Quantities.  
 Costs including fees, contingencies and VAT and indicate schemes budgeted 
amount.  
 Programme – bar chart in weeks/months.  
 Recommendations.  
 References - White papers, feasibility reports, previous and / or other phases 
design reports, etc.  
 Annexures - not greater than A3 size containing a locality plan.  
 
Usually 5 copies of each report will  be required.  
 
An expanded framework for the design report is included in the design folder.  
 
6.3 Sustainability  
 
Sustainability must be designed into the development process. At least the following 
should be confirmed (preferably in the Design Report) before going out to tender:  
 Name of the identified WSP;  
 Budgeted Operation and Maintenance costs;  
 Amount allocated for basic water supply;  
 Cost recovery mechanisms and expected revenue;  
 Other sources of operating funds (such as Equitable share).  
 
6.4 Drawings  
 
Drawin gs should generally comply with the following standards:  
 All drawing work shall be done on A1, or smaller size sheets with the client’s 
standard title block. All electrical drawings to be A3.  
 The drawings remain the property of the Client.  
 The minimum lett er size is 3mm.  
 All drawings shall be signed by the employer or his representative.  
 Alterations to drawings may only be authorised by the employer or his 
representative.  
 Index drawing sheets of the complete scheme or part thereof as per type drawing, 
must  be drawn up giving a list of all drawings with their description and must be 
subsidised in sections with appropriate section headings. Reference must be made 
on all drawings to these index drawing numbers.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   33 
  Every project shall have a compilation/ property diagram drawing(s), showing the 
required expropriation and/or servitude requirements for bulk water pipelines up 
to the revenue flow meter and associated dimensions.  
 Cross sections on drawings shall be consecutively numbered for each part of the 
project. T he number and section as well as the sheet number where the section is 
shown must be indicated on the drawing where the position of the section is 
shown, i.e. 49 section number 12 sheet number  
 Pipeline drawings shall contain a summarised complete profile d rawing(s) 
indicating the pipeline profile, design and field test pressure lines, pipeline and 
valves' major characteristics.  
 Detailed profile drawings shall contain a plan view showing major topographical 
features, property boundaries and all other items a s per DWS 1110 clause 4.1 (See 
Design Folder for Standard Specifications).  
 Drawings prepared by the Consulting Engineer must bear a partners or directors 
signature.  
 Drawings prepared by the Contractor must be thoroughly checked by the 
Consulting Engineer w ith particular regard to compatibility with proposed, 
adjoining or existing works.  
 Manufacturers’ drawings shall be supplied as specified in mechanical contracts 
and wiring and circuit diagrams shall be supplied as specified in electrical 
contracts.  
 Where civil works are based on plant layout drawings prepared by the 
mechanical/electrical contractor, the drawings shall be formally approved by the 
mechanical/electrical representative of the employer, after which the layout may 
not be altered without repeatin g the procedure.  
 On completion of the works the original drawings must be updated to the “AS 
BUILT” condition, clearly marked "AS BUILT” and all drawings returned to the 
employer or his representative for safekeeping in a format as specified. The 
original will be returned to the Consulting Engineer for his records. Submitted not 
later than 3 months after completion of the project.  
 
Approval of the specification or drawing shall not absolve the Consulting Engineer of any 
responsibility.  
 
6.5 Standard drawings  
 
A number of standard drawings are included in the Drawings Folder . CAD software is 
required to read these drawings.  
 
6.6 Special drawing requirements and operating and maintenance manuals  
 
Special requirements for drawings for tendering, manufacturing, and cons truction of a 
mechanical/electrical nature and special requirements for mechanical and electrical 
operating and maintenance manuals are included in the  Design Folder . Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   34 
  
6.7 Design specifications  
 
The following DWAF specifications are relevant to the design of C ommunity Water 
Supply Schemes and are included in the Specifications Folder . DWAF gives its approval 
to any municipality or water board to use or adapt, for their own purposes, any of these 
specifications:  
 
NUMBER  DESCRIPTION  
DWS 0510  Drilling and groutin g 
DWS 0750  Water retaining concrete  
DWS 1110  Construction of pipelines  
DWS 1130  Design, manufacture and supply of steel pipes  
DWS 1131  Lining and coating of steel pipes and specials  
DWS 1140  Design, manufacture and supply of asbestos -cement pressure p ipes 
and joints  
DWS 1150  Glass reinforced plastics (GRP) pipes and joints for use for water 
supply  
DWS1160  Design, manufacture, supply, and installation of Polyvinyl Chloride 
(PVC) Pressure Pipes and fittings  
DWS 1710  Bricklaying  
DWS 1720  Plasterer, ti ler, and floorer  
DWS 1730  Glazing and painting  
DWS 1740  Plumbing  
DWS 1810  Specialist services  
DWS 1910  Supply, delivery, installation and commissioning of mechanical and 
electrical equipment for a bio -filter plant  
DWS 1930  Supply, installation and com missioning of water treatment plant 
equipment  
DWS 1940  Design, manufacture, supply, delivery, installation and 
commissioning of package water treatment plant  
DWS 1950  Supply, installation and commissioning of a reverse osmosis unit 
for the desalination o f mineralised water  
DWS 2010  Boundary fencing  
DWS 2410  Landscaping  
DWS 2510  Valves (set of specifications)  
DWS 9900  Corrosion protection (set of specifications)  
DWS GTE  General Technical Specifications (Electrical)  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   35 
  
7 BOREHOLES  
 
7.1 Borehole development s teps 
 
The establishment of potable groundwater sources for community water supply entails 
hydrogeological related investigations and the drilling and test pumping of existing and 
new boreholes.  
 
It is a requirement that the establishment of potable ground water sources should be 
executed under the controlled supervision of qualified and suitably experienced 
hydrogeologists, (geologists, geophysicists and hydrogeological technicians).  
 
The hydrogeological services required during project implementation are as follows:  
 
 Assessment of existing groundwater sources.  This may require the test pumping 
of existing boreholes, rehabilitation or re -drilling of boreholes, chemical analysis 
of water samples from existing boreholes and an examination of documentation 
relating to the reliability and sustained discharge rate of existing boreholes.  
 
 Groundwater quality assessment.   In areas with marginal water quality, testing 
of newly drilled boreholes or equipped existing boreholes should not commence 
prior to availabilit y of chemical analysis results of TDS, NO 3 and F.  
 
 Borehole siting.  The hydrogeologist is responsible for ensuring that appropriate 
scientifically based methods are used to identify suitable drilling targets (sites) in 
accordance with hydrogeological condi tions for exploration drilling. In order to 
ensure safe working conditions and to limit the risk of pollution entering the 
groundwater abstraction facility, borehole sites are also affected by the existence 
of manmade structures such as roads, pipelines, c emetries, sewage plants, 
overhead powerlines, buildings, etc.  
 
 Supervision of borehole drilling and administration of drilling contracts.  The 
hydrogeologist is responsible to ensure that boreholes are drilled, designed and 
constructed to the required stand ards by controlled and on site supervision of 
drilling rigs. One supervisor is to supervise at least two drilling rigs up to a 
maximum of three drilling rigs.  
 
 Supervision of borehole test pumping and administration of testing contracts . 
The hydrogeologis t is responsible to ensure that the required and appropriate 
calibration, multi -rate draw -down, constant discharge, and related recovery tests 
are conducted to the required standards by on site and controlled supervision of 
testing contractors.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   36 
  
 Borehole yield recommendations.  Motorized borehole pumps are generally 
warranted only in instances where a discharge rate in excess of 0,5l/s can be 
maintained for a continuous pumping period of eight hours or more per day. 
Borehole yields must always be determined  on the basis of 24 hour per day 
pumping.  
 
 Reporting.  A technical report documenting all data and information is required 
on completion of investigations. The project hydrogeologist is required to ensure 
that data requirements from the hydrogeologist and c ontractors are documented 
on appropriate data recording forms and submitted to DWAF.  
 
 Borehole development.  This comprises the removal of drilling fines from the 
aquifer pores, removal of drilling foam/mud and establishing a reverse filter 
around the bore hole aquifer interface. Duration of development can vary from a 
couple of hours (formation stabilizer, hard rock formations) to several days 
(unconsolidated fine sandy aquifers). Boreholes must also be disinfected or 
sterilized of any bacteria, and particu larly coliform bacteria, intruded into the 
borehole during drilling operations.  
 
 Borehole Protection and Marking . The borehole is protected from foreign 
material by means of a lockable cap fitted to the borehole collar. The borehole 
should be marked with a  pole (5 meters to the north of the borehole) of 
approximately 2,0 m high with a number plate, showing the borehole 
identification number.  
 
 Borehole pump testing.  The pump testing contractor is required to test newly 
drilled boreholes which have not yet be en equipped and existing boreholes which 
may or may not already be equipped with pumping installations. The type of 
borehole test methods required include:  
Slug Test  
Calibration Discharge Test  
Stepped Discharge Test  
Constant Discharge Test  
Recovery Test  
 
 Monitoring the resource.  The geohydrologist must develop a monitoring system 
for at least one full hydrological year to evaluate the resource response to the safe 
yield abstraction rate. After this period the monitoring program should be re -
assessed and pla nned according to prevailing climatic conditions.  
 
7.2 Borehole pumps  
 
The pump specified must not be capable of exceeding the safe yield of the borehole when 
utilized over a 24 hour period.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   37 
  
The rest and pumping water levels in a borehole may vary considerab ly during drought 
and above average rainfall sequences. Choice of type of borehole pumping plant must 
take this into account.  
 
The selection of the particular pumping unit must also take into account the following 
factors:  
 The static head between the lowes t drawdown level anticipated in the borehole 
and the delivery point at the borehole top.  
 The friction generated in this length of rising main given due attention to the 
presence of any operating rods within the rising main.  
 The static and friction heads fr om the top of the borehole to the top water level of 
the delivery point.  
 The ability of the pumping plant to commence operation under the full static head 
conditions of the pump unit.  
 The ability of the pump to start operation with the riser pipe empty.  
 The level at which the pumping unit has to be placed in the borehole must be as 
specified by the hydrogeologist or based on reliable information known to the 
engineer should a hydrogeologist not be available.  
 
Borehole pumps can be powered by means of line s upply electricity, solar power, or 
diesel power. It is generally not acceptable to provide motorised borehole pumps in 
boreholes yielding less that 0,5 litres per second.  
 
7.3 Borehole monitoring and other equipment  
 
All boreholes and borehole pumping plant mu st be provided with equipment to monitor 
pump, borehole and aquifer performance. The main components required are:  
 Water meters  
 Hour meters  
 Water level depth measuring devices –a conduit pipe (20 -25mm diameter) next to 
the riser in the borehole through whi ch a measuring cable can be lowered is 
preferred, however an electrical transducer or pressure pipe is an alternative.  
 Operational equipment  
 
The following operational equipment is required:  
 Non return valve, to prevent backflow into borehole.  
 Isolating va lve, to prevent backflow into the borehole. Only allowed for positive 
displacement pumps if a pressure relief valve is installed upstream of the valve.  
 Scour valve.  
 Valves placed to enable removal/replacement of meter in exceptional 
circumstances.  
 Pressure  release valve upstream of all isolating valves.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   38 
  Pressure cut out switch with manual control and pressure cut out switch with 1 to 
2 hour timed reset in auto control (if electrically operated).  
 Delivery pressure gauge.  
 Low water level in borehole cut out r elay with manual control and low water level 
in borehole cut out relay with 1 to 2 hr. timed reset in auto control (if electrically 
operated).  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   39 
  
8 DAMS AND WEIRS  
 
 
8.1 Dams  
 
In some cases dams will be required to store surface runoff and to provide the bulk wate r 
supply source.  
 
The size of the dam is dependent on the water demand, the required assurance of 
delivery, the hydrological characteristics of the river, and the characteristics of the dam 
basin.  
 
The type of dam to be constructed will, amongst others, de pend on site configuration 
(topography), foundation conditions and the availability of suitable construction 
materials.  
 
8.2 Weirs  
 
Where a dam is used for bulk water storage, and the water is released down the river, it 
may be necessary to construct a weir at  the point of abstraction. The purpose of the weir 
is usually to provide limited balancing storage for the bulk releases from the dam.  
 
Weirs can also be constructed to store limited amounts of runoff, or even, by allowing the 
basin to be filled with alluv ial material, to create a reservoir within the alluvial sand from 
which water can be abstracted.  
 
In the case of weirs, siltation is a far greater problem than in the case of large or medium 
sized dams. The outlet works and abstraction points of weirs need  to be kept free of silt.  
 
Weirs, generally being of a limited height and capacity, will also be overtopped by (large) 
floods. They will therefore need to be constructed of concrete or other non -erodable 
material.  
 
A site for a weir, where both the riverb ed and the abutments consist of good quality rock 
is an ideal situation. More usually the weir is founded on rock in the river section and one 
or both of the abutments will comprise of soft river -bank materials. In this case special 
measures are required t o prevent outflanking of the structure by (large) floods.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   40 
  
8.3 Approved professional engineer  
 
Dams are site specific. The Dam Safety Regulations may require that an Approved 
Professional Engineer (APE) assume responsibility for the design depending on the si te, 
capacity, and hazard potential of the dam. The classification of a proposed dam is done 
by the Dam Safety Office of DWAF upon submission of an application listing the 
pertinent data.  
 
Dams can be categorized into the following categories:  
 Category I,  
 Category II, and  
 Category III.  
 
 
The design of weirs should also be undertaken, or supervised, by competent engineers 
who are conversant with the particular problems associated with these structures.  
 
8.4 Outlet works of dams and weirs  
 
 
The outlet works of a t ypical dam comprises the following components:  
 Outlet works;  
 Outlet pipe systems  
 Intake entrance  
 Control valves for outlet works  
 Isolating valves  
 Control valves  
 Intake isolating gates  
 Under water wall mounted sluice gates  
 Maintenance cranes  
 Screening of i ntake works  
 
The requirements for the outlet works of a typical Class I Dam is described below:  
 
8.4.1 Depth of water draw off  
 
Water drawn from the dam directly to the water treatment works should come from the 
upper 1,2m layer of the dam.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   41 
 8.4.2 Outlet pipe systems  
 
Dual system outlets should be provided in order to ensure continuous outlet from the 
water sources during repair or maintenance of the main outlet.  
 
At the most upstream point of the outlet pipe system, an emergency closure by means of 
an underwater wall  type spindle driven sluice gates operated by manual actuators may be 
employed only if the size of the outlet is in excess of 600 mm diameter.  
 
8.4.3 Intake entrance  
 
The most upstream exit from the dam/reservoir should consist of a bellmouth. 
Maintenance of bel lmouths is practically impossible due to leakage through the isolating 
gate seals (if gates are employed) and limited working space downstream of such gates. 
Intake bellmouths and adjacent pipework should thus be fabricated from stainless steel up 
to the d ownstream isolating valve.  
 
Should the pipework downstream of the isolating valve be built into concrete or buried in 
earth, this pipework should also be fabricated from stainless steel.  
 
Accessible pipework in any outlet system i.e. pipes which are expose d and are 
removable, may be fabricated from mild steel and corrosion protected.  
 
HDPE pipework is acceptable for small dams. Reducers and pipework directly adjacent 
to valves should be of fabricated steel.  
 
The coupling of built -in steel or HDPE pipework s hould be SABS or BSS 4504 flanges 
only and should be rated according to the hydrostatic pressure of the outlet works. 
Flanges should normally be used to join built -in pipes. HDPE pipe may not be joined 
with friction grip couplings. Friction grip couplings are unacceptable in other cases as 
well except where construction joints occur.  
 
Air supply pipes should be fitted to the outlet bellmouth top and extended to above the 
high flood level of the dam. The air pipe should be at least 1/6 th of the diameter of the 
outlet pipe.  
 
8.4.4 Control valves for outlet works  
 
8.4.4.1  Isolating valves  
 
Pipe outlets should be provided with a valve downstream of the pipe entrance to facilitate 
maintenance of the control valves and downstream pipework. Pipe outlets up to 300 mm 
in diameter  should be provided with open port resilient seal valve (RSV) type gate valves. Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   42 
 Rising and non -rising spindles are acceptable. Pipe outlets exceeding 300 mm diameter 
should be fitted with butterfly valves double flanged or wafer type having horizontal 
spindles only so as not to be affected by silt build -up on the bottom of the pipe. For small 
dams and weirs, manual actuation can be specified for all isolating valves. Manual 
operation is to be provided as far as possible due to the low cost and lower mainten ance. 
Larger valves may be fitted with manually operated gearboxes to limit operating forces 
on the hand wheels or levers to 100 kN.  
 
Isolating valves should all be situated in fully accessible boxed -out chambers having 
suitable drainage facilities.  
 
Valv es situated in chambers less than 1,8 m deep should be provided with extension 
spindles, which are operable from the deck of the chamber.  
 
Valves in chambers more than 1,8m deep should be accessible via vertically mounted 
access ladders.  
 
All isolating val ves should be removable by means of either approved flange adapters or 
in line pipe couplings situated directly downstream of such valves.  
 
Supports should be provided under pipework at either side of dismantling couplings, 
excepting in cases where such co uplings are converted to thrust absorbing couplings by 
means of studs and thrust collars.  
 
8.4.4.2  Control valves  
 
Control valves are to be situated at the end of outlet works pipelines to facilitate 
controlled flow outlet from the dam.  
 
resilient seal valve (RSV)   type gate valves are acceptable control valves for small dams 
and shall as far as possible be manually operated.  
 
In cases of free discharge into rivers, adequate protection must be given to the 
environment in the immediate vicinity of the valve to preve nt erosion.  
 
8.4.4.3  Control valves - needle type  
 
Only in extreme instances where low head loss is important should in -line needle valves 
be used for controlled water outlet from the dam or weir.  
 
Since needle valves are mounted in the pipeline, their energy diss ipating qualities are not 
as effective as sleeve valves. It is thus advisable to either provide the pipe exit 
downstream of the valve with a flared disperser, which is to be shaped to cause a 
hydraulic jump or alternatively the exit should disperse into a stilling chamber.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   43 
  
Needle valves should be operated manually in the case of low head dams (12 meters 
maximum). It is essential to have a mechanical position indication in 10% increments on 
the handwheel headstock in order to facilitate accurate water outle t control in accordance 
with the flow chart provided with the valve.  
 
Acceptable needle valves are more fully described in Standard Specification DWS 2510 -
1996.  
 
8.4.4.4  Intake isolating gates  
 
Dam outlet works having maintainable horizontally placed outlet pipew ork may be 
provided with emergency closure gates i.e., gates which are capable of closing under 
fully unbalanced condition and against high flood conditions (HFL).  
 
Emergency closure is required for unforeseen simultaneous failure of the isolating valve 
and control valve or a failure in the pipework or pipe couplings downstream of the outlet 
entrance.  
 
The construction and functioning of wall mounted sluice gates, which have positive 
spindle drives, are more fully described below.  
 
Dam outlet works having v ertically placed outlets may be isolated by means of a rubber 
lined steel sphere or tapered plug. These however only serve as service closure 
mechanisms i.e. to isolate pipe entrances under balanced hydrostatic conditions.  
 
8.4.4.5  Under water wall mounted sluice gates  
 
These gates are generally spindle driven units which are secured in a sealing frame where 
sufficient movement is provided upwards for the gate to clear the inlet fully open and for 
the downward stroke to seal off the opening completely.  
 
These gates  are primarily proprietary items provided by private concerns and are 
provided with either metal to metal sealing qualities or alternatively with rubber to metal 
seals. Departmental designs for such gates for operation under low head conditions are 
also av ailable i.e. for water heads in the order of maximum of 6 meters. Wall mounted 
sluice gates are spindle driven units where the spindle is supported against buckling by 
means of wall mounted brackets, spaced to suit the design criteria.  
 
Since these gates a re permanently submerged all materials used should be of stainless 
steel. Exposed sealing frame components built into concrete should be stainless steel 
grade 316 or 316 L. The gate body should be of at least stainless steel 304 and 304 L. All 
fasteners sh ould be of stainless steel.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   44 
 Drive spindles should consist of stainless steel 304 or 304 L as well as submerged wall 
mounted spindle guide brackets. Wall bracket spindle guide sleeves should be of 
vescolene PP, ultrablack, or vesconite and should be split to facilitate removal of the gate 
spindle without having to remove the wall bracket in the process.  
 
All fasteners for under water fixing of components to concrete should be of stainless 
steel.  
 
All fasteners used on the assembly of the gate and sealing fr ame should similarly be of 
stainless steel.  
 
Operating gear for wall mounted sluice gates should as far as possible be manually 
operated. The screwed spindle shall be stainless steel and should be driven through a 
brass nut by means of a handwheel mounted on a headstock. The headstock, which is to 
be mounted on the concrete deck of the outlet works, may be of mild steel fabrication 
(galvanised).  
 
Rising spindle designs are essential since experience has proven that submerged drive 
nuts used on non -rising sp indle designs renders the gate inoperable due to algae and other 
debri suspended in the water which enters the drive nut thread.  
 
Rising spindle drives should be provided with position indicator in 10% increments from 
the fully open to fully closed stroke of the gate.  
 
The indicator arrow should be driven by the spindle either within a slot in the headstock 
or in a column mounted on top of the headstock over the rising spindle. The manual 
operating force on the handwheel or cranking lever should not exceed 100 kN. Gearboxes 
may be employed to reduce operating forces to within the given limit. Handwheel 
diameters should not exceed 600 mm and lever arm radii should not exceed 400 mm.  
 
8.4.5 Maintenance cranes  
 
Affordable maintenance cranes in the form of slewing jib  type, A -frame structures or 
monorail hoist structures should be provided for the handling i.e. installation and 
removal, of accessible mechanical components forming part of the outlet works of the 
dam such as valves and pipework. Removable manually operat ed hoist units should be 
employed as far as possible, which includes geared chain hoists, pneumatic chain hoists 
or winches.  All hoist structures should be designed in accordance with BSS 2573, BSS 
466 and should comply with the requirements of the Occupa tional Health and Safety Act.  
 
Crane structures should provide sufficient approach to enable an operator to offload the 
equipment from a truck and to install such equipment with ease and visa versa. The 
structures should be of simple, affordable basic desi gn and fabricated from galvanised 
mild steel.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   45 
 Fasteners having key functions in the structural strength and stability of the structures 
should without exception, especially in respect of supporting carriage beams, monorails 
etc. be of stainless steel. Gea red trolleys having manual drive chains to facilitate long or 
cross travel should be fitted to the carriage rails/beams. All crawl beams should have 
removable end stops to prevent over -travel of the trolleys and hoist units. To prevent 
deterioration of the  hoist units due to outdoor exposure, they should be removed directly 
after each use and suitably stored for future use as may be required.  
 
To prevent overloading of cranes, the safe working loads should be clearly displayed on 
the travel beams, hoist tro lley as well as on the hoist or winch unit, example 1,5t SWL. 
Hoist units and winches as well as travelling trolleys are proprietary items.  
 
Structures especially those of slewing jib cranes should be designed to ensure that 
minimum maintenance will be req uired and should incorporate self lubricating bronze or 
plastic bushing and sealed roller ball or thrust bearings. It is however essential to provide 
sufficient lubricating nipples at all strategic points of moving components.  
 
8.4.6 Screening of intake works  
 
In order to prevent debris from entering the outlet pipes of the dam from the upstream 
side and thus forming blockage of the isolating and especially the control valves, 
removable fine screens having clear openings between slats of 20 mm (min) to 25 mm 
(max ) are to be provided and placed at a distance of 1,5 X pipe outlet diameter 
(minimum) from the intake pipe entrance. These screens are to be placed upstream of the 
emergency gate or wall sluice gate in all instances and should either be individually 
lowere d in guides, one on top of the other by use of either an automatic grapple or by 
inter-linking the screen elements in cases where more frequent removal is required.  
 
The screen size should be such that the water velocity through the slats does not exceed 
2m per second.  
 
The total height of the stacked screen units should extend from the very bottom outlet 
pipe up to at least 500mm above the high flood level (HFL) of the dam or weir.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   46 
  
9 WATER TREATMENT WORK S 
 
 
9.1 General  
 
As with dams, the design of the water t reatment process is a specialist field of expertise 
and should be done by a suitably trained professional engineer.  
 
Certain broad guidelines can however be given for planning purposes.  
 
9.2 Potable water quality  
 
Potable water should comply with SANS 241.  
 
9.3 Selection of appropriate treatment process  
 
The selection of an appropriate treatment process is essentially determined by:  
 The raw water quality (physical and chemical).  
 The prescribed final water quality.  
 
9.4 Recommended loading rates and design parameters fo r water treatment 
process units  
 
The following loading rates and design parameters can be given as guidelines only and 
should be tested against actual circumstances:  
 
 Rapid mixing: at least 500mm head loss (mixing in G values, G = 2000-5). 
 Floculation: 10 min. Retention with a total head loss of about 150mm and G = 
50s-5 (40 - 80)-5 
 Horizontal flow settling tanks (in lieu of other flow types) are recommended for 
turbid raw waters > 200NTUs with manual sludge or hydraulic sludge withdrawal 
and a maximum load ing rate of 1m3/m2.h. 
 Direct gravity filtration as secondary solid/liquid phase separation step: filtration 
rate 5m/h with upstream flow control.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   47 
  
 Upflow -downflow (series) filtration: only to be constructed when the raw water 
turbidity rarely exceeds 100N TU (say 5% of the time). Recommended filtration 
rates are:  
o Upflow:  5m/h  
o Downflow:  10m/h  
 Flotation: recirculation rate of 10% and a loading rate of 6m3/m2.h. 
 Sludge and wash handling facilities: for design purposes assume that the sludge 
will thicken to a 1 0% concentration. The sludge dam should be large enough for a 
planning horizon of 6 to 8 years and space should be available for a second dam.  
 Production losses through water plant: allow 3% to 5%.  
 Chlorine contact time: 6% of flow capacity. 6% x 24 = 1,5 hours.  
 Clear water sump for high lift pumps: 2% of flow capacity.  
 Sludge disposal to sludge dams.  
 Design flow capacity of plant to be based on the average daily summer demand 
plus 5% for production losses.  
 
The sludge from settling (sedimentation) tanks sh ould at least flow to sludge lagoons 
from where only the supernatant flows to rivers. Reclamation can be considered where 
water is scarce and supernatant can be used.  
 
9.5 Automation  
 
If a water treatment plant has more than 4 rapid gravity sand filters, the f ilter 
backwashing sequence may be automated. Other operations, for example chemical dosing 
and sludge withdrawal will only be automated in plants bigger than 50  000m3/d (579 
litres per second).  
 
Automation shall be motivated and not governed by hard and f ast rules.  
 
9.6 Structural considerations  
 
It is recommended that all reinforced concrete water retaining structures should be 
designed to a 0,2mm crack width using 30MPa concrete in accordance with BS8007.  
 
9.7 Accessibility  
 
All units should be easily accessible , and easily removed for repairs. Walkways should be 
provided to give safe access to all points requiring inspection and to provide logical 
progression to operators doing inspections. Ease of handling chemicals should receive 
special attention.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   48 
  
9.8 Specifica tions  
 
The following specifications are relevant for the design, manufacture, supply, 
construction, and commissioning of water treatment plants.  
 
Departmental Specification  Description  
DWS 1930  Supply, installation and commissioning 
of water treatment pla nt equipment.  
DWS 1940  Design, manufacture, supply, delivery, 
installation, and commissioning of 
package water treatment plant.  
DWS 1950  Supply, installation, and commissioning 
of a reverse osmosis unit for the 
desalination of mineralised water.  
 
These specifications are included in the Specifications Folder . 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   49 
  
10 PUMP STATIONS  
 
 
10.1 Introduction  
 
Community water supply schemes are likely to involve the pumping of relatively small 
quantities of water. Pump stations are often be sited at small purification work s or as 
booster pump stations along pipelines.  
 
Normally the electrical power supply will be provided by Eskom or the local authority.  
 
10.2 Pump selection  
 
The following steps should be followed to select the correct pump duty:  
 The system curve, relating to  the hydraulic head lost in the system for different 
flows, is calculated and plotted as a graph above the required static head. Pump 
Station losses, including those of all valves in the pumpline, should be included in 
the calculation of the system curve.  
 The pump performance curves are then plotted on the same graph. If more than 
one pump is required then these are added either in series or in parallel, as 
required. The pump curves will intercept the system curve at the station duty 
point.  
 An ideal pump s election will result in each Pump Duty Point falling at or very 
near to the pump Best Efficiency Point (BEP).  
 When only one pump in a multi -pump arrangement is operating, the intercept with 
the system curve will be at a point of reduced head and increased  flow with regard 
to the chosen Pump Duty Point.  Care should be taken that the motor is not 
overloaded under the one pump condition, and that a margin of at least 15% in 
excess of what the pump will demand is ensured under the worst possible 
operating con dition.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   50 
  
10.3 Pump standby capacity  
 
For Surface Water Pump Stations:  
 100% standby capacity for single pumps  
 33% minimum standby acceptable for larger pump sets.  
 
For Borehole Pump Stations:  
 No standby pump capacity is required, but a minimum of 2 boreholes m ust be 
equipped for a village.  
 
10.4 Power requirements for pumps  
 
The power supplied to a pump must equal the total power required for the duty as 
calculated above with an allowance for pump and motor efficiency, and in addition the 
following factors must be a dded:  
For Motors > 25 kW:  Add 10% to power requirement  
For Motors < 25 kW:  Add 25% to power requirement  
 
10.5 Pump control  
 
Centrifugal pumps should be started and stopped against a closed valve.  
 
All controls should be designed to operate "fail safe".  
 
All pumps should be provided with emergency stops adjacent to the pump.  
 
Pumps may be controlled manually, by means of downstream pressure (reservoir 
pressure) or by means of telemetry. The following rules apply:  
 
MANUAL Pump Control:  
 Top Open Inlet to Storage  or Combined Bottom Inlet/Outlet.  
 Manual or Timer Control for starting and stopping of pumps.  
 Manual override switch for starting and stopping of pumps.  
 
PRESSURE Pump Control:  
 Top or Bottom inlet to storage.  
 Float Level Control.  
 High Pressure Cut -Out swit ch for pumps – must always switch off pumps, even 
when on manual.  
 Time delay restart for pumps (minimum 30 mins.)  
 Manual override switch for starting and stopping of pumps.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   51 
 TELEMETRY Pump Control:  
 Top Open Inlet to Storage or Combined Bottom Inlet/Outlet  
 Automatic Telemetry Cut -In and Cut -Out Level Control for pumps.   
 Settings for Cut -In levels:  
 Reservoirs:   4 hr x GAADD below TWL  
 Elev. Tanks:   1 hr x GAADD below TWL  
 Minimum distance of 150 mm, in all cases, between cut -in and cut -out levels.  
 Manual ove rride switch for starting and stopping of pumps.  
 
10.6 Pump station building  
 
The suggested requirements for a pump station building are as follows:  
 
 Pump station floor level: determined in conjunction with the minimum N.P.S.H. 
(net positive suction height) of the pumps. The effect of surge in the suction 
pipeline and manifold should also be checked for pump start -up and trip 
conditions.  
 Top of the pump well should not be below the 1:50 year flood level for pump 
stations built along a river. This can be raised t o say 1:100 year flood level if the 
pump station is downstream of a dam wall. If the pump station is built upstream 
of a dam wall then the motor floor must at least be 2,0 m above the 1:100 year or 
the high flood level, whichever is the greater.  
 The pump s tation should be accessible during all weather conditions.  
 The protective fencing must be designed in accordance with the protection 
requirements of the area, usually barbed wire spaced at 100mm intervals with 
razor -cut flat coils fencing materials.  
 Storm water to be drained away from the pump station during the construction and 
operation phase.  
 Corrosivity of the soils surrounding the pump station concrete structure should be 
investigated.  
 Pump wells should be anchored to prevent flotation.  
 Light fittings must be vandal proof. Light bulbs must be easily changed. 
Fluorescent lighting is acceptable. Security lighting to be provided with daylight 
switches. High masts to be furnished with lightning down conductors.  
 Generally no external windows will be allowed.  Fixed and sturdy ventilated 
louvers with insect screens must be provided instead.  
 Facilities (crawl beam and loading bay) for the safe removal of the pumps and 
motors should be provided where the weight of the equipment is such that it 
cannot be manhandle d. 
 The loading bay entrance doors should preferably be of the roller shutter type 
(rugged design).  
 Normally steel roofs should be used. Reinforced concrete roofs could be three 
times as expensive as steel roofs. Timber should not be used.  
 The following st air dimensions are suggested:  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   52 
 Risers:  160 to 178 mm high  
Treads: 265 to 300 mm long  
 Off shutter concrete finished areas i.e. pump well walls, concrete columns, etc., 
should generally not be painted.  
 Hot dip galvanised treatment  
All internal handrails, stee l cat ladders, steel stairways and eggrate flooring.  
Steel windows, doors and door farms.  
Roller shutter doors.  
 Structural steelwork to be protected and painted as per SANS 1200 HC.  
 Generally vinyl tiles on floors except loading bay, workshops, store room s and 
very low traffic areas around and in pump well which should be concrete wood 
screed.  
 
NOTE:  Many of the pump station guidelines are also applicable to the design of 
water treatment work structures and reservoirs.  
 
10.7 Pumpline components  
 
10.7.1  Baseplates  
 
Pumpset baseplates should be machined and must be adequately anchored and grouted to 
robust concrete plinths. Pumpset and pipework out -of-balance thrust loads must be 
adequately restrained by concrete or steel supports and pipework must be supported to the 
floor or walls within the pump station.  
 
Pumps and motors should be located by dowels, once aligned.  
 
10.7.2  Pumps  
 
Suitable pumps are:  
 single stage end -suction or horizontal split,  
 multi stage, horizontal, for treated water (not recommended for raw water owing 
to excessive wear on balancing disc),  
 single or multi stage vertical in raw water wet -well application (product -
lubricated with thrust bearing outside the flow tube), or  
 progressive cavity pumps.  
 
10.7.3  Pump coupling  
 
Belt drives are unacceptable for electrically d riven pumps.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   53 
 10.7.4  Pump components  
 
Impellers or rotors should be either a zinc -free bronze or stainless steel.  
Cast iron impellers are not acceptable.  
Impellers and pump casings should be fitted with renewable bronze or stainless steel 
wearing neck -rings.  
 
Pump testing should be to BS 5316 part 2 class B undertaken at an acceptable test 
facility, e.g. SABS or at the pump manufacturer if test facilities meet with the standards.  
 
10.7.5  Motors  
 
Limited to motors of 185kW (400V).  
 
Motors should be (TEFC.) Totally Enclos ed Fan Cooled( 1C 0141) with cast iron body 
and should be 3 phase 400V induction type . 
 
10.7.6  Pumpset speed  
 
Pumpset speed should not be greater than 1 480 rpm (4 - pole).  
2-pole motors ± 2 800 rpm are only acceptable under exceptional circumstances.  
 
10.7.7  Switchgear  enclosures:  
 
All switchgear and control panel enclosures should be rated IP54.  
 
10.7.8  Valves  
 
See DWS Standard 2510 in Specifications Folder . 
 
Isolating valves:  
 
Double flange gate valves should be specified (resilient seal valves up to 1,6Mpa).  
 
Isolating valv es at both pump suction and pump delivery should be hand operated and 
double -flanged to permit stripping of the pump or control valve. A wafer type valve will 
not permit this and is therefore unacceptable.  
 
The upstream (suction) isolating valve should hav e the same pressure rating as the 
delivery isolating valve.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   54 
 Control valves  
 
Flow and pressure control valves are not acceptable. In order to reduce excessive surges, 
double flanged reflux valves are preferred. Alternatively surge tanks should be provided 
or an alternative form of surge control.  
 
Mounting of butterfly valves  
(or valves with adjustable seals with specific reference to their use in or relating to pump 
stations)  
 
The seal should always be accessible from the side of the valve “facing the pump ”. 
 
The direction in which the valve is to be placed, should be specified by the supplier.  
 
Butterfly valves should be supported and not fixed.  
 
10.7.9  Instrumentation and protection  
 
All instrumentation must be mounted on vibration free surfaces.  
 
Temperature se nsors (pump thermal protection) should be fitted in the pump casing to 
protect the pump against closed valve conditions.  
 
RTDs (Resistance Temperature Detectors) are preferred for motors greater than 50kW 
and should be embedded in the motor windings, two p er phase providing one set spare.   
 
In typical community water supply size of pump station, motor or pump bearings as well 
as pump glands need not be monitored.  
 
Pressure sensors  
 
A low suction pressure sensor should be provided and located between the su ction 
isolating valve and the pump suction flange.  This device should monitor and ensure that 
the pump does not operate under conditions that will result in cavitation within the pump.  
 
A pump delivery pressure sensor should be located between the pump de livery flange and 
the reflux or other control valve.  This device should monitor two conditions:  
(1) on start -up, that the pump is generating full pressure and it is safe to open the 
delivery isolating valve, and  
(2) in operation, that when the level controlled valve at the receiving reservoir 
located at the upper end of the rising main is closed, the ensuing increase in pump 
delivery pressure should be employed to stop the pump.  The delivery isolating 
valve should then be re -closed before restarting the pump.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   55 
 Pressure gauges  
 
Each pumpline should be equipped with two pressure gauges. One should display the 
pressure at the pump suction flange, the other, the pressure at the pump delivery flange.  
 
In addition, one pressure gauge should be installed to measure the  pressure in the station 
delivery manifold itself.  
 
Pressure gauges should be glycerine filled and be calibrated in metres  head  of water. The 
range of operation should be from zero to 50% in excess of the pump "closed valve" 
pressure.  
 
All pressure gauges should be supplied with isolating and drain cocks, piping, and fitted 
with a pulsation damper.  
 
Flow meters  
 
Usually ultrasonic  flowmeters should be used where electronic type metering is required.  
Where this type of meter is not justified mechanical type  meter are acceptable.  
 
10.7.10  Control panel  
 
All panels should have a test button to test all lamps. For indication lamps use only 
cluster type LED with coloured lens caps (blue LED's are not available).  
 
The pumpline control panel (whether combined with the mot or starting switchgear, or 
separate) should contain the following displays:  
 
 Green lamp  - "pump running".  
 Red lamp   "pump stopped".  
 White lamp   "pump tripped".  
 Blue lamp   "pump available".  
 
The blue "pump available" lamp should be illuminated only when all  safety conditions 
being monitored are healthy, i.e.:  
 motor winding temperature sensors, and  
 suction pressure sensor healthy.  
In addition electric power should be available.  
 
Should any one of these safety sensors indicate an "unhealthy" or faulty conditi on the 
pump should be tripped and the white "pump tripped" lamp should be illuminated. In 
addition, the station panel alarm should sound.  
 
Audible alarm devices should be time controlled (3 minutes) as these devices are 
sometimes sabotaged by nearby reside nts. Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   56 
  
Also mounted on the control panel should be the following push buttons:  
 pump start        - green  
 pump stop        - red 
 emergency stop     - red mushroom (lockable)  
 alarm accept (to silence station alarm)    - black.  
 trip cancel (to cancel white lamp af ter fault is rectified)  - black.  
 Auto/manual switch if remote auto controls are used, such as level devices or 
telemetry. When in manual mode warning devices must still be operative.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   57 
  
11 LOW VOLTAGE ELECTRIC AL 
EQUIPMENT  
 
 
11.1 General guidelines  
 
The DWAF General  Technical Specifications (Electrical) (GTSE) are included in the 
Specifications Folder . 
 
SANS 0142 and other standard specifications as set out in the GTSE as well as 
regulations of Eskom and local authorities must be followed where applicable.  
 
The Occup ational Health and Safety Act (Act 85 of 1993) applies in all instances.  
 
11.2 Design report  
 
The design report must include the results of a quality investigation of the electrical 
supply. This could determine the starting methods to be used by the various ele ctric 
motors. Direct on line starting is always preferred if possible.  
 
11.3 Important aspects to consider  
 
Cognisance should be taken of the following aspects:  
 
 Environmental;  
 Aesthetics;  
 Safety to equipment and personnel;  
 Spares cost & availability;  
 Ease of o peration;  
 Future extensions;  
 Maintainability;  
 Availability;  
 Serviceability;  
 Technology improvements;  
 Quality of equipment;  
 Energy conservation;  
 Quality of electrical supply; and  
 Economics.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   58 
  
11.4 Maximum voltage  
 
No voltage higher than 400V should be used. High er voltages must remain the 
responsibility of the electricity supply authority.  
 
11.5 Metering points  
 
A dedicated transformer should be negotiated with the relevant supply authority for each 
metering point to avoid quality of supply problems originating from t he supply 
authorities 400 volt system.  
 
The total cost of the supply point is important and should be determined before final 
designs are submitted.  
 
11.6 Motors  
 
Motors must meet the necessary pump requirements.  
 
11.7 Power cables  
 
Power cables must be suitable fo r short circuit and environmental conditions.  
 
11.8 LV switchboards and motor control  
 
11.8.1  Construction  
 
The following requirements are recommended for switchboards:  
 IP54 enclosure;  
 Free standing;  
 Extensible;  
 Flush tiers front and rear;  
 Accessible front and rear wi th hinged doors in front and removable panels at the 
rear; 
 Door locking and safety lockout systems are required;  
 Steel construction (2mm);  
 Colour white internal and lighter electric orange external;  
 Provide ventilation slots on face panels and doors with v ermin screens behind 
slots;  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   59 
  Ensure that all panels are totally vermin proof; and  
 Use substantial gland plates at bottom of panels (3mm thickness).  
 
11.9 Switchgear  
 
11.9.1  Circuit breakers  
 
The following requirements for circuit breakers are recommended:  
 The incoming circuit breaker of the main LT switch board, which receives the 
supply from the supply authority or transformer, must be equipped with adjustable 
earth leakage protection as well as an adjustable time delay facility to create the 
necessary discriminating b etween this breaker and other earth leakage protectors 
further down the line.  
 Selective tripping between incoming and outgoing circuits must be provided.  
 Protection grading must be effective for all operating conditions.  
 Where circuit breakers are used to protect contactors, motor protection circuit 
breakers equipped with shunt trips to trip the circuit breaker in the event of short 
circuit or earth faults should be used. The contactor should not be required to clear 
these types of faults.  
 Fast acting circu it breakers should be used in all instances.  
 Motor circuit breakers should allow for long duration (up to 10 second) start ups.  
 HRC fuses should not be used as these tend to get tampered with and are not 
always readily available.  
 All circuit breakers must be selected to handle the maximum possible fault current 
taking into consideration possible future extensions involving and increase in the 
available fault current.  
 
11.9.2  Isolators  
 
Isolators should be load breaking \ fault making type.  
Isolator should be locka ble in the OPEN position.  
 
11.9.3  Contactors  
 
Contactor should comply with IEC 158 -1 for Class AC3 unless the specific duty requires 
a higher rating.  
De-rate contactors should be used in areas where ambient temperatures exceed 350C. Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   60 
  
11.9.4  Switch gear general  
 
No byp ass facilities on protection equipment, level relays, etc. are allowed.  
All power, signal and control cables must be numbered on site and on drawings.  
 
11.10  Motor protection  
 
The following requirements for motor protection are recommended:  
 Comprehensive motor p rotection is required where the requirements are such that 
the normal thermal overload protection will not be adequate. A versatile, 
multifunction motor protection unit or relay is therefore to be used.  
 For motors below 15kW thermal overload protection may  be used provided single 
phase, phase reversal, and under load protection is provided. For under load 
protection, phase angle type relays may be used.  
 Trip mechanisms should be settable with front panel mounted buttons and trip 
conditions should have indic ator lamps on the front panel.  
 Under and over voltage protection must be provided to disable the motor starter 
control circuits excluding the remainder of the pump station.  
 Automatic re -start must be prevented when trips occurred due to over/under 
current conditions. In such instances make use of an alarm plus a manual restart.  
 Provide adequate motor, pump, and pipe earthing.  
 
11.11  Indication and instrumentation  
 
The following instrumentation is required:  
 Combined thermal demand and instantaneous ammeters on all  incomers, and 
transformer feeders.  
 One ammeter per phase.  
 Motor starter panels one ammeter.  
 Voltmeter with selector switch on each incoming panel.  
 Maximum demand/kWh combination meters will normally be required on the 
incoming sections.  
 Power factor ind icating instrument where warranted.  
 
Other indication will include:  
 Run lamp;  
 Emergency Stop lamp;  
 Ready lamp (not applicable in the case of boreholes and small pumpstations);  
 Overload lamp;  
 Motor winding lamp (over -temperature) where motor winding tempera ture 
sensors are available in motors;  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   61 
  Supply Voltage lamp; and  
 Running hour meter.  
 
Other requirements for indication are:  
 Where necessary for safety reasons a control voltage should be 24v.  
 All alarm indication must be latched and reset by a reset button.  
 Only mercury bulbs or 3 wire level relays should be used for level controls in 
reservoirs. Ultra sonic level sensing is not acceptable.  
 Borehole level sensing should be done with equipment using normal wires.  
 To assist operators, three "cable live" neon indication lamps should be provided 
on incoming supplies.  
 
11.12  Control  
 
11.12.1  General  
 
Easily maintainable systems using relays, etc. must be used.  
PLC’s are only to be used where warranted.  
 
If PLC's are used (see above) full lighting protection must be provided f or all inputs, 
outputs, and power supplies.  
 
11.12.2  Local control  
 
Local control should consist of pushbuttons as follows:  
 Start;  
 Stop;  
 Emergency Stop (At motor starting cubicle and at motor);  
 Reset; and  
 Lamp test.  
 
11.13  Power factor correction  
 
Power factor correctio n must only be provided where it can be proved before -hand that it 
is economically justified.  
Power factor correction equipment, if provided, should preferably be mounted directly on 
the motor.  
Automatic power factor equipment should be avoided.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   62 
 11.14  Earthin g 
 
The following requirements for earthing are recommended:  
 Earthing may consist of an earth mat, trench earth, electrode earth, or a trench and 
electrode combination scheme.  
 An earthing survey must be carried out by a specialist where necessary.  
 All eart hing must be connected to a common earth bar at the lowest possible point 
where separate systems are provided for instrumentation, LV and MV.  
 All exposed earthing must be  PVC insulated copper conductors. All other must 
be bare copper conductors.  
 Maximum resistance to earth is 1  for LV systems and 2  for MV systems.  
 The supply authority's requirements regarding earthing must be taken into 
consideration.  
 One drawing showing the overall arrangements must be provided.  
 
11.15  Lightning protection  
 
The requirements for lightning protection are:  
 Lightning protection must be provided for safety purposes as well as for the 
protection of equipment and instrumentation.  
 Surge arrestors must be of the metal oxide type in accordance with SANS 172.  
 Guard against the use of lo ng control cables between eg. reservoirs and pump 
stations to minimise damage due to lightning.  
 Use MOV (5 - 10kA) surge arrestors on both ends of control cables between eg. 
level sensing equipment and motor controls.  
 Provide lightning protection for instr ument supply cables.  
 Provide lightning protection for panel incomers.  
 
11.16  Conduit wire ways and conduit  
 
11.16.1  Conduit  
 
All conduits must be galvanised steel conduit in accordance with SANS 1665 and should 
be surface mounted.  
 
11.16.2  Wire ways (conduit and trunking)  
 
Sepa rate wire ways must be used for normal power and lighting, emergency power and 
lighting, standby power and lighting, control wiring, and extra low voltage wiring.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   63 
  
11.16.3  Cable ways  
 
The requirements for cable ways are:  
 Cable routes should be specified. This sho uld be in trenches, in floors, or cable 
ladders against walls.  
 Floor trenches should be filled with sand and screeded over after completion of 
the installation. Provision should be made for draining of cable trenches. Gland 
drip water should be piped into a no-fines opening into the trench, next to the 
pump set in this case, to keep the sand wet.  
 Heavy duty galvanised beehive type racks supported at least every 750mm on 
galvanised angle iron brackets should be used to support aerial and vertical cables.  
 Stainless steel straps should be used to attach cables to cable racks, masts, etc.  
 Pipes must not be used for cable ways for motor cables. Channel iron or other 
protection and support that allows sufficient ventilation should be used.  
 
11.16.4  Switches and socket out lets 
 
Light switches should be placed in galvanised steel box in accordance with SANS 1065, 
1,2m above finished floor level.  
 
16A Switched socket outlets should be placed in 100mm x 100mm boxes.  
 
Three phase welding sockets with built in earth leakage shou ld be provided.  
 
11.16.5  Wiring  
 
One circuit per conduit wire way is allowed. All un -armoured conductors should be 
installed in conduit or wire ways. All cables and conductors must be protected by suitably 
rated switch or fuse gear.  
 
Conductors originating from di fferent switchboards may not be installed in the same wire 
way.  
 
Minimum conductor sizes are:  
 Lighting circuits  1,5mm2 power and 2,5mm2 earth conductors  
 Socket outlets   2,5mm2 power and 2,5mm2 earth conductors  
 Stove circuits   10mm2 power and 6mm2 earth con ductors  
 Bell circuits   1,5mm2 
 Clock circuits   1,5mm2 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   64 
  
11.17  Lighting, luminaires and masts  
 
11.17.1  Lighting  
 
Task lighting of 160 lux is required for each pump.  
 
Walkways, footpaths, staircases, general movement areas etc. must be lighted according 
to SANS 10098.  
 
Maintained emergency lighting must be provided where applicable.  
 
11.17.2  Luminaires  
 
For ease of maintenance, light fittings should be mounted against walls at a maximum 
height of 3,5m.  
 
Depending on the application and the required lighting levels fluorescent, inca ndescent or 
HPS luminaires may be used.  
Exterior luminaires are to be rated to IP65.  
Luminaires manufactured from sheet steel or aluminium may not be used.  
 
Highmast luminaires must be 250W HPS.  
 
ES Screw in lamps incandescent fittings should be used.  
 
11.17.3  High masts  
 
Streetlights should be mounted on 8m standard poles with a 2m outreach.  
 
High masts should be of the 12m hinged type with removable hand winch.  
 
11.18  Standby generators  
 
Where standby generators are provided, the change -over switches between standby and 
normal electricity must be both mechanically and electrically interlocked and conform to 
the supply authorities requirements.  
 
Batteries for standby generators should be charged from the mains supply.  
Fuel tank level and battery voltage sensors should be provided (for possible use with 
telemetry systems).  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   65 
  
12 TELEMETRY  
 
 
12.1 Maintenance  
 
It is normally recommended that telemetry be maintained by maintenance contractors.  
 
12.2 General guidelines  
 
Telemetry will normally be required where there is a need to exchange  data and 
information between two or more distant or remote installations or sites, e.g. between a 
remote reservoir and a pump station or control room.  
 
The design engineer should take consideration of the following:  
 
 Environmental impact;  
 Safety to equipm ent and personnel;  
 Affordability;  
 Ease of operation;  
 Maintainability;  
 Serviceability;  
 Compatibility with existing systems;  
 Quality;  
 Aesthetics;  
 Best practice;  
 Spares costs and availability;  
 Future extensions;  
 Availability; and  
 Technology improvements.  
 
12.3 Typical system configuration  
 
A typical system may consist of a master station and a number of outstations. Depending 
on the distance and terrain, repeater stations may be required. Typical data or information 
that may be transmitted is for example:  
 valve pos ition;  
 reservoir level;  
 pump status, e.g. running, stopped, tripped etc;  
 start/stop commands; and  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   66 
  camera images.  
 
The telemetry installation consists of the following elements:  
 transducers and field instrumentation;  
 cabling;  
 communication system; and  
 contr ol systems.  
 
To protect and enable the above to operate two ancillary systems are required, namely:  
 power supplies; and  
 lightning protection and earthing.  
 
12.4 Transducers and field instrumentation  
 
12.4.1  General  
 
In most cases the instrumentation, transducers and s ensors will be supplied and installed 
by the various other Contractors, e.g. electrical or pump contractor. However situations 
may arise where no other Contractors are employed and in these cases the supply and 
installation of the instrumentation equipment  must form part of the telemetry installation.  
 
12.4.2  Technical requirements  
 
In general all transducers/sensors must comply with the following - 
 analogue outputs   4 - 20 mA  
 supply voltage    24 V DC (nominal)  
 accuracy    ± 0,3 %  
 reliability    + 5 000 hours  
 housin g   suitable for environment.  
 
12.4.3  Back up requirements  
 
Where valves are controlled, limit and back up switches must be provided.  
Level transducers must be backed up by float switches.  
 
12.4.4  Compatibility  
 
Cognisance must be taken of compatibility with existing e quipment.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   67 
 12.5 Cabling  
 
12.5.1  Power cables  
 
The installation of these cables are covered in the Department's Specifications on 
Electrical Installations included in the Specifications Folder . 
 
12.5.2  Data cables  
 
For correct performance of cables for data transmission, the correct type and size cable 
must be selected for the application e.g. data transmission speed, noise, distance, type of 
data (analogue or discrete) etc.  
 
As a general rule, the following should apply:  
 Low data transfer rates: Low frequency type cables e.g.  twisted pair;  
 High data transfer rates: High frequency type cables e.g. co -axial cables, optic 
fibre or special type of twisted pair;  
 High noise and lightning environment: Shielded cable or optic fibre cable.  
 
The number of cables or pairs must make allow ance for future extensions. Cables must be 
suitably protected against damage.  
 
12.6 Communication system  
 
The communication system consists of the following sub -systems:  
 
 Radio equipment – Transmitters and receivers;  
 Antennas and Masts;  
 RF cabling;  
 Power supply  system; and  
 Lightning protection and earthing.  
 
12.6.1  Transmitter and receivers  
 
The Transmitters and Receivers should comply with the requirements of SANS 300086.  
 
The specification should address the following :  
 
 RF output power   Normally 2 - 30 W  
 Modulation    Phase or frequency  
 Frequency stability   3 - 5 ppm  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   68 
  Allowable audio distention   less than 5%  
 Maximum spurious radiation and harmonics  < 70 dB  
 Channel spacing    12,5 kHz.  
 Number of channels    4 minimum  
 Frequency bands    VHF (68 - 88 MHz),  
 VHF (146 - 174 M Hz) and UHF (450 - 470 mHz)  
 Microwave (2,4GHZ; 10GHZ)  
 GSM (HSCO; GPRS; SMS)  
 Input impedance  50 ohm.  
 
12.6.2  Masts and antennas  
 
a) Masts  
 
Construction of masts should be metallic self supporting lattice or sectional pole.  
Steel is preferred above 4m.  
12m and abo ve must have stay wires.  
The finish should be galvanised steel.  
The design load, including antenna, is a wind load of 160 km/h (and snow load where 
applicable).  
 
b) Antennas  
 
Gain:    6 dB depending on signal  
Type:    Omni -directional or directional where ap plicable  
Nominal impedance:  50 ohm  
Material:   Aluminium.  
 
c) RF cabling  
 
All RF cabling must be low loss coaxial cable suitable for outdoor use.  
Suitable protection must be provided to the cable where exposed to damage.   
Minimum bending radius must be sp ecified.  
 
12.7 Control systems  
 
12.7.1  Control modes  
 
Local and remote control modes are required, i.e.. it must be possible to switch between 
local and remote control.  
Both control modes can be either automatic or manual.  
Distributed control should be employed with override and monitoring by the telemetry 
system.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   69 
 Failure of the telemetry system should not affect the local control.  
Telemetry must not be able to start or stop in local control.  
 
12.7.2  Man machine interface  
 
Computers must be specified as follows:  
 17 inch moni tor; 
 Pentium IV 2GHZ or higher  
 40G Hard Drive  
 At least 512 MB memory.  
 
A display unit must be provided or the existing display upgraded or reprogrammed at the 
master control panel to display all the data and control parameters from the out stations, 
includ ing all alarms, equipment status, valve positions, levels, etc.   
All controls should be effected from this interface, either automatically or by the operator 
when selected.  
Sufficient data storage capability must be provided for backup and data storage.  
 
12.8 Power supplies  
 
Suitable power supplies with adequate battery back up facilities must be provided.  
 
The batteries may be charged from one of the following sources:  
 
 AC main supply with rectifier and protective equipment  
 Solar cells  
 WIVA chargers.  
 
Solar ce lls will be used where no mains power is available.  
 
Alarm signals should include the following:  
 
 Low battery voltage;  
 Mains failure (if applicable);  
 Solar panel (if applicable);  
 Intruder alarm;  
 Communication failure.  
 
In general the power supplies must co nform to the following:  
 
 Output voltage: 12 Volt for normal use or 24 Volt for transducers;  
 Protection: Overcharging, under voltage, cut out, power surges, reverse polarity.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   70 
 Rating:  
 Data transmission only: 30%Transmit/Receiver 70% standby for 48 hours;  
 Data and Voice transmission:  50% Transmit/Receiver 50% standby for 48 hours.  
 
12.9 Lightning protection and earthing  
 
Suitable protection must be provided to protect equipment, including:  
 
a) Earth Electrode System  
 
 Maximum resistance 5 ohms. 1 ohm if possible;  
 Test points are to be provided;  
 SANS 10199 is applicable;  
 Concealed joints and interconnections brazed or welded.  
 
b) Bonding all exposed steelwork and other steelwork that may become "live" due to 
equipment faults, static build up or lightning strikes are to be bonded.  
 
c) Lightning Protection  
 
All equipment should be considered exposed to lightning strikes and suitable protection 
must be provided.  
 
All instrument boxes should be earthed by a 70 mm copper earth wire.  
 
12.10  Documentation and training  
 
Complete ma intenance and operating manuals must form part of the scope of supply.  
 
As-built documentation must be provided and must include:  
 Control logic;  
 Cabling; and  
 Physical layout.  
 
Operating and Maintenance manual must also be provided.  
 
12.11  Spares  
 
A full set of s pares must be included with the manuals.  
 
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   71 
  
13 PIPELINES  
 
 
13.1 General  
 
Water supply is delivered under pressure either by gravity or by pumping.  
 
Water supply pipelines are generally designed to convey water free of suspended matter 
and generally of potable qu ality.  
 
Laying and jointing are important operations that contribute to the life of a pipeline and to 
the level of service provided. These can constitute a significant factor in pipe selection, 
especially where labour based construction methods are utilize d. 
 
The prime function of any pipe and pipe material is that, for the expected life of the 
pipeline, there is adequate resistance and strength to withstand all forces that can be 
expected to be imposed on the pipe. These forces and requirements include:  
 Internal forces including internal pressure and pressure surges;  
 External forces including earth pressure and superimposed loads;  
 Water tightness; and  
 Corrosion.  
 
Generally refer to DWS 1110 Clause 4  (included in the Specifications Folder)  for the 
design and  setting out of pipelines.  
 
13.2 Design capacity  
 
See Planning and Design Parameters in the Preliminary Design Section.  
 
13.3 Pipeline materials  
 
The pipeline material that provides the lowest life cycle cost should be selected. The 
selection procedure as proposed i n Section 3 of Darling and Hodgson’s “Pipe Selection 
Manual, 1996”  is recommended.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   72 
  
Suitable pipeline materials are tabulated below:  
 
Pipe Materials, Classes and 
Acceptable Sizes:  DWAF 
DWS  
Specification  Class (bar)  Sizes 
(mm)  
Minimum pipe size for reticu lation:  50mm nominal diameter  
HDPE (SANS 533)  None  Min. Class 6  15 - 75 
uPVC (SANS 966 or ISO 
4422)  DWS 1160  Min. Class 6  50 - 250 
Note:  125 and 140 mm sizes are not recommended for uPVC pipes, due to the 
lack of standard  
fittings.  
21GRP  DWS 1150  Min. Class 6, Max. 
25 bar  Min. 
150 
Galvanised Mild Steel (SANS 
62) None  Medium Duty  15 – 150 
Steel (> 150mm)  DWS 1130  Min. API 5L Grade 
A 
Min. wall thick. t = 
4,5 mm  
Slenderness, D/t < 
120 Min. 
200 
Max. Press. incl. surge (m) = 120*t/D, where S = 
Yield  
Point Stress (MPa) and D = Outside Dia (mm).  
 
Formula assumes max. of 60% of yield stress 
mobilised.  
Protection to steel pipes (> 
150 mm):  Generally bitumen fibre wrap coating with 
cement mortar lining or epoxy lining and 
cathodic protection – see DWS 1131.  
 
13.4 Pipeline velocities  
 
The following maximum and minimum pipeline velocities are recommended:  
 
 Minimum Raw water:     0,6 m/s,  
 Minimum Treated water:    0,3 m/s,  
 Maximum DPFR for Reticulations:   1,5 m/s,  
 Maximum Pump suction inside station:  2,0 m/s,  
 Maximum Design flow in Bulk Supply:  3,0 m/s,  
 Maximum Scour flow in Pipelines:   5,0 m/s,  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   73 
 13.5 Pipe friction factors  
 
Only Colebrook -White or Darcy -Weisbach formulae (with friction factor, , determined 
using Moody diagram or equivalent formula); or Hazen -William s formula, with C factor 
equivalent to k s for pipe diameter and velocity, are acceptable for design.  
 
Pipe friction factors are provided in the table below:  
 
Pipe Friction Factors (Absolute Roughness, k s, mm)  
 Pipelines;  
(excl. fittings losses)  Reticulatio n 
(incl. fittings losses) ; 
uPVC or GRP  0,06 mm  0,10 mm  
Steel (cement mortar 
lined)  0,20 mm  0,26 mm  
 
 
13.6 Depth of pipe cover  
 
The minimum depth of cover to main pipelines are:  
 
 Generally:    600mm  
 Under cultivated land:   900mm  
 Road/Railway crossings:  1000mm  
 
Additional protection should be provided to pipes under roads or railways where 
required.  
 
13.7 Vacuum pressures  
 
Vacuum pressures in Bulk Supply Pipelines during shutdown and scouring of pipes are 
generally unacceptable, but 3 m maximum is acceptable to econo mise on Double Orifice 
Air Valve installations.  
 
13.8 Cover  
 
750mm minimum cover with 1000mm cover required under road crossings.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   74 
  
13.9 Trench width  
 
Allow for at least the pipe diameter plus 150mm on both sides for small diameter 
pipelines to ensure that backfilli ng is effectively rammed. The minimum trench width 
should be 500mm.  
 
13.10  Bedding and backfill (including material)  
 
According to SANS 1200  and DWS 1110  (see Specification Folder ) where applicable.  
 
13.11  Slope  
 
A slope of steeper than 0,3% is required to avoid air p ockets.  
 
13.12  Meters  
 
Schemes should be provided with bulk metering from the water source.  
 
The supply to each local authority should be separately metered.  
 
All stand pipes should be measured.  
 
Where house or yard connections are provided, the consumption of e ach individual 
household should be measured.  
 
13.13  Delivery point  
 
For a basic level of service in rural communities the delivery point should be the stand 
pipe or a yard tank.  
 
13.14  Pipe markers  
 
Refer to DWS 1110 in Specifications Folder.  
 
Pipe markers are require d at a minimum spacing of 500m unless the pipeline follows a 
road.  
 
All bends should be marked.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   75 
 13.15  Air release and air intake valves  
 
Air valves should be provided on summits of main lines.  
 
Air intake valves are required upstream and downstream of isolatio n valves on ascending 
and descending pipeline slopes respectively.  
 
The minimum distance between air valves should be 500m.  
 
Separate isolating valves are required on each air valve branch for maintenance purposes.  
 
Refer to Messrs Mulric Hydro Projects’ c atalogue No. RBX 0001  for the selection and 
positioning of air valves.  
 
Diameter of branch below air valve should be as follows:  
 Pipeline =< 200 mm NB: Install an equal T piece below air valve.  
 Pipeline > 200mm NB: The branch pipe must be as large as pract ically possible 
with a maximum diameter of 600mm NB for all pipelines > 600mm NB.  
 
13.16  Scour valves  
 
Should be provided at all low points.  
 
Scour valves should be so sized that the pipe can be drained between the isolating valves 
within 2 hours.  
 
The diameter of the drainpipe should be 0,4 times the diameter of the main pipe but 
should be an equal T for pipelines =< 200mm NB.  
 
13.17  Isolating valves  
 
Should be placed:  
 At all pipeline intersections in the branch and main line.  
 At an approximate distance of 1,5km, pref erably at the lowest points.  
 Start of every rising main with arrow pointing towards the pumping station.  
 At the end of every gravity main with arrow on valve pointing in flow direction.  
 
Isolating valves should be mounted with flange adapters to aid in rem oval.  
 
13.18  Valve chambers  
 
Valve chambers of robust construction should be provided for all valves.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   76 
 Valve chambers must be properly ventilated with vermin proof fixed GMS or 3CR12 
louvered ventilators.  
 
Sufficient access should be provided in valve chambers f or the removal of bolts.  
 
The cover should be 700mm above ground level and should be of a hinged and non -
removable type.  
 
A sump should be provided for dewatering.  
 
The chamber should be secure against vandalism.  
 
13.19  Pressure control valves  
 
Pressure control valves are not favoured and their use should be minimised.  
 
Break pressure tanks should be used for pressure reduction where possible, but the 
correct placing of reservoirs is preferred.  
 
13.20  Thrust blocks and anchors  
 
Coupled pipelines must be anchored at:  
 All changes of direction greater than 10 degrees.  
 At changes in pipe size.  
 At slopes greater that 1:6.  
 At blank ends.  
 
The anchor blocks must be large enough to:  
 Provide sufficient friction and bearing forces between the anchor block and soil to 
balance the thrust force in any direction; and  
 Balance upward forces through the mass of the block.  
The pipe should be imbedded at least up to the centre line at bends.  
A flexible membrane should be inserted between the pipe and anchor block to prevent 
damage to pipes  subject to chafing.  
 
13.21  Structural design  
 
Pipelines should be designed for internal and external pressure including surge pressure.  
 
The structural load bearing capacity of the pipe is specified by the manufacturer and care 
should be taken not to expose the  pipe to loading conditions other than that intended by the 
manufacturer.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   77 
 13.22  Corrosion protection  
 
Refer to DWS 1131 in Specifications Folder . 
 
13.23  Couplings  
 
Two major categories are generally used, namely rigid and flexible joints.  
 
Flexible joints are define d as those joints that allow some telescopic movement or angular 
flexure of the adjoining pipes.  
 
13.23.1  Rigid couplings/joints  
 
13.23.1.1  Flanges  
 
Flanges should be attached to pipes by metal -arc welding, the weld preparation being in 
accordance with the requirements of BS806 Type 6  unless otherwise specified.  
 
A slip -on welded flange is suitable for all design pressure conditions covered by BS flange 
tables up to and including Table J  and design temperatures not exceeding 425oC, with 
pipes 80 mm and over.  
 
Flanges should  be in accordance with BS 4504 . 
 
13.23.1.2  Welded bu tt joints  
 
Butt joints welded by the metal -arc process should be in accordance with the requirements 
of DWS 1130 and DWS 1110 . 
 
13.23.1.3  Screwed couplings  
 
Pipes should be screwed taper and sockets parallel thread according  to SANS 1109 or ISO 
7/1.  
 
Galvanized pipes may be threaded after galvanizing.  
 
The use of parallel threads on light pipes are not recommended.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   78 
  
13.23.2  Flexible couplings  
 
All flexible coupling should be able to withstand an internal pressure equal to or great er 
than the design working pressure of the pipe.  
 
The couplings should be able to withstand any external pressure due to installation 
conditions without the presence of an internal pressure.  
 
Spigot and socket joints utilizing a rubber ring as a seal shou ld be watertight under working 
pressure with a shear force equal to the expected external load applied to the coupling.  
 
Rubber O -rings used for sealing should not elongate more than 25% of the original length 
when stretched over the spigot end of a pipe. See BS 2494.  
 
Rubber o -rings should not be exposed to ultra -violet radiation or ozone for periods longer 
than the time required for installation.  
 
Where a pipeline is likely to be subjected to any abnormally corrosive condition, the pipe 
manufacturer shoul d be contacted in advance so that they may advise on the suitability of 
their joints for the purpose, or alternatively in collaboration with their rubber supplier, 
provide rings that will meet the requirements of the situation.  
 
Sleeve type joints using a flexible plastic sleeve must conform to the misalignment test 
according to the relevant SANS standard for that specific type of pipe utilizing the 
coupling.  
 
The draw and slew movement of the coupling will be in accordance with the requirements 
of the rele vant SANS standard for that specific type of pipe utilizing the coupling.  
 
13.24  Fittings  
 
13.24.1  Reducers / diffusers and inlets  
 
The range of angle of deflection for concentric or eccentric diffusers (enlarging diameter) 
should be between 2,5 – 30 degrees.  
 
Where a vailable NPSH is a problem, rounded inlets should provide better flow 
characteristics and less friction losses.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   79 
  
13.24.2  Bends  
 
Refer to DWS 1130 . 
 
Elbows should not have a bending radius smaller than the outside diameter of the pipe.  
 
Medium and long radius bend s should not have a radius larger than seven times the outside 
diameter of the pipe. Long radius bends normally have a radius of approximately three 
times the outside diameter of the pipe.  
 
Standard angles of elbows are: 90, 45 and 22,5 degrees.  
 
13.24.3  Dividers  
 
All flow dividers will cause change in flow direction and should therefore be properly 
anchored.  
 
Standard angles of deviation from the main pipe are: 90, 60, 45, 22.5 and 11 degrees.  
 
13.24.4  Puddle or thrust flanges  
 
Puddle or thrust flanges should be provided  where a pipe passes through a water retaining 
structure or chamber.  
 
A thrust flange will assist in the transfer of axial pipe forces due to water hammer or 
surges.  
The flange should be designed structurally to withstand the shear forces it will 
experien ce.  
 
Steel pipelines should be insulated with paint where they pass through concrete.  
 
13.24.5  Reinforced specials  
 
The procedures developed H.S. Swanson et al have been incorporated into AWWA M11 - 
Steel pipe - A guide for design and installation , and are genera lly used in the design of 
reinforced specials.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   80 
  
13.25  Pipeline specifications  
 
The following DWAF specifications are applicable to pipelines and are included in the 
Specifications Folder . 
 
NUMBER  DESCRIPTION  
DWS 1110  Construction of pipelines  
DWS 1130  Design,  manufacture and supply of steel pipes  
DWS 1131  Lining and coating of steel pipes and specials  
DWS 1140  Design, manufacture and supply of asbestos -cement pressure 
pipes and joints  
DWS 1150  Glass reinforced plastics (GRP) pipes and joints for use for 
water supply  
DWS1160  Design, manufacture, supply, and installation of Polyvinyl 
Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipes and fittings  
DWS 2510  Supply of valves  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   81 
  
14 RESERVOIRS  
 
 
14.1 Storage  
 
Reservoirs should be designed for the following storage capacities:  
 Elevated stora ge capacity should be designed for 2 hours of peak daily demand 
for the area served by the elevated storage.  
 Ground level reservoirs that are gravity fed: 24 hours of annual average daily 
demand.  
 Ground level reservoirs that are pump fed from one source wi thout a standby 
power supply or pump: 48 hours of annual average daily demand (all storage 
inclusive).  
 Storage based on 60 litres per capita per day demand.  
 
14.2 Storage for small ground water schemes  
 
If ground level storage can be located close to the villag e and provide the required 
residual head for the reticulation, then 36 hours or 48 hours storage at 60 lcd should be 
provided according to the number of boreholes utilised.  
 
However, if achieving the minimum residual pressure requires an elevated tank, the n it is 
recommended to omit the ground level storage.   
The elevated tank should only be sized for 16 to 24 hours of 25 lcd (10 years design 
horizon), and the borehole pumps should pump directly into the tank.  
 
An elevated tank so sized will be adequate in  the short term and will be a suitable 
investment for use as an elevated tank in conjunction with ground level storage at a future 
date.  
 
14.3 Design  
 
It is recommended that all reinforced concrete water -retaining structures be designed to a 
0,2mm crack width u sing 30MPa concrete in accordance with BS8007 . 
 
Potable water tanks must have roofs.  
 
Storage must be provided for sludge accumulation and a scour valve must be provided. 
The scour pipe should be separate from the inlet or the outlet pipe.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   82 
 Submerged valve s and fittings must be avoided if possible.  
 
Pipework below the reservoir floor should be minimized.  
 
A screen should be provided at the outlet.  
 
14.4 Materials  
 
The selection of materials is dictated by durability and life cycle costs.  
 
14.5 Metering  
 
Bulk metering  is essential.  
 
Whether the meter should be placed at the inlet or the outlet depends on the institutional 
or contractual arrangements.  
 
14.6 Level control and indication  
 
The reservoir must not be capable of spilling under normal operating conditions.  
 
A wat er level indicator should be provided.  
 
14.7 Position  
 
The reservoir should be provided close to consumers to avoid long pipelines having to 
cater for the instantaneous peak demand.  
 
14.8 Break pressure tanks  
 
Correctly placed reservoirs are preferred in place  Break  Pressure Tanks, but  when this is 
not practical, the following guidelines are applicable to break pressure tanks:  
 
Tanks to have a partition wit h duplicate pipework and control valves etc.  
 
The minimum volume per partition:  
 Gravity inflow and outflow – 5 minutes  
 Pumped inflow and/or outflow – 30 minutes  
 
Inlet control:  
 Gravity – Float Level Control  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   83 
  Pumped – as per pump control  
 
Control Valves are not preferred, but if required, then provision must be made for 
adequate maintenance.  
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   84 
  
15 STAND PIPES, YARD TA NKS AND OTHER 
CONSUMER CONNECTIONS   
 
 
15.1 Stand pipes  
 
A concrete plinth should be provided which allows the water to drain into a soak -away 
(sump with crushed stone).  
 
The tap should be high enough for a container to fit underneath. Preferably a stand should 
be provided for the container to stand on, with a higher tap.  
 
The tap should preferably be of the push button or self -closing type.  
 
Consumer off -takes directly on pumping mains are not acceptable.  
 
15.2 Yard tanks  
 
The yard tanks should be approximately 200 lit res in size to provide adequate storage for 
daily supply. The flow into the yard tank must be regulated by means of a flow constraint 
mechanism to maintain supply at approximately 200 litres.  
 
The level of the outlet must be high enough to ensure a 25 -litre container can fit easily for 
filling.  
 
As in standpipes, a concrete plinth should be provided below the outlet to allow waste to 
drain into a soak -away (Sump with crushed stones).  
 
Sunlight entry into the tank should be prevented to prevent algae growth.  
 
15.3 Valves  
 
An isolating valve should be provided at each standpipe.  
 
15.4 Pressure  
 
The minimum pressure at the hydraulically highest tap under a dynamic loading of 80% 
of the stand pipes being open should not be less than 6m.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   85 
 The maximum static pressure should  be 90m.  
 
15.5 Minimum flow  
 
The flow rate from the outlet of a standpipe should not be less than 10 litres per minute.  
For yard tanks it should be a maximum of 6000 litres per household per month.  
 
15.6 Coverage  
 
A maximum of 25 households or 100 people per stand p ipe. 
 
15.7 Walking distance  
 
A maximum of 200m where feasible.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   86 
  
16 VENTILATED IMPROVED TOILETS  
 
 
16.1 Introduction  
 
Providing adequate sanitation facilities for residents is a major challenge in all developing 
countries. Those who have inadequate sanitation may be usi ng a bucket system, 
unimproved pit toilets or the veld or any toilet which is not properly operated and 
maintained.  
 
When a sanitation system fails, or is inadequate, the impact on the health of the 
community and the negative impact on the environment can be extremely serious. 
Outbreaks of diarrhoea and of cholera could occur.  
 
The VIP toilet has a number of advantages over other toilet systems. The capital and 
operation and maintenance costs of a VIP are low, standard designs are available, only 
semi -skilled labour is required for their construction and the availability of a constant 
supply of water is not a factor.  
 
The purpose of this standard is primarily to assist authorities and funding agencies in 
settting acceptable minimum standards for the design a nd construction of VIP toilets.  
 
Individual households often copy the VIP toilets constructed by nearby formal 
programmes. It is hoped that this standard will create an expanded sphere of influence in 
that the VIP toilets constructed in accordance with thi s standard should stand as examples 
for surrounding communities who wish to build their own.  
 
16.2 DefinitionS  
 
Ventilated Improved Pit Toilet (VIP toilet)  is a toilet which comprises:  
 a pit into which the excreta falls and from which the liquid fraction seeps into the 
surrounding soil;   
 a slab which covers the pit and which has two holes, one for the excreta to fall 
through and one for the vent pipe;  
 a superstructure which provides privacy and which prevents light from entering 
the pit;  
 a vent pipe which remo ves odour from the pit;  
 a fly screen at the top of the vent pipe which  prevents flies from entering the pit 
and which also prevents flies that have entered the pit from leaving through the 
vent pipe.  
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   87 
 The Strategic Framework provides various definitions  relating to a basic sanitation 
facility, a basic sanitation service and the eradication of the bucket system, as follows:  
 
Basic sanitation facility  is: 
The infrastructure necessary to provide a sanitation facility which is safe, reliable, 
private, protec ted from the weather and ventilated, keeps smells to the minimum, is easy 
to keep clean, minimises the risk of the spread of sanitation -related diseases by 
facilitating the appropriate control of disease carrying flies and pests, and enables safe 
and appro priate treatment and/or removal of human waste and wastewater in an 
environmentally sound manner.  
 
Basic sanitation service  is: 
The provision of a basic sanitation facility which is easily accessible to a household, the 
sustainable operation of the facilit y, including the safe removal of human waste and 
wastewater from the premises where this is appropriate and necessary, and the 
communication of good sanitation, hygiene and related practices.  
 
[A Ventilated Improved Pit toilet (VIP) complies with both the old and revised 
definitions of a basic sanitation facility.]  
 
Eradication of bucket toilets:  
The bucket system is an unsuitable and inappropriate level of service. All water services 
authorities must identify and implement programmes for the eradication of  all bucket 
systems by 2006.  
 
The social, economic and cultural circumstances in the community,the geographical 
location and the technical characteristices of the different sanitation facilities all play 
major roles  in the choice of the most appropriate s anitation system. In most situations, 
however, the ventilated improved pit (VIP) toilet together with good domestic health and 
hygiene practices will meet the requirements of a basic minimum level of service.  
 
16.3 Operating principles  
 
No water is needed to op erate a VIP toilet (i.e. there is no flushing).  
 
The pit should retain sufficient moisture for biological decomposition to occur, as the 
faecal matter will not break down if the pit is too dry and as a result the pit will fill up 
rapidly.  
 
The egress of wa ter from the pit should be adequate to prevent the pit being filled up 
rapidly with faeces and urine.  
 
Provision should be made to access the pit of a VIP toilet through the slab in order to 
empty it manually or per vacuum action when required. Alternative ly it should be 
possible for the VIP toilet to be moved when the pit is full.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   88 
  
Odour is removed from the pit through the action of wind blowing across the vent pipe 
and to a lesser extent by the air heating up on the inside of the vent pipe.  
 
Flies, which are attracted into the pit by the smell, are trapped by the fly screen at the top 
of the vent pipe as they try to escape to the light.  
 
16.4 Material  
 
16.4.1  Concrete  
 
The concrete should be capable of coping with the exposure conditions expected. Where 
necessary this  will dictate cement and aggregate selection.  
 
Recommended volumetric mix proportions are given in table  1. 
 
Table 1 — Volumetric mix proportions for concrete and mortar  
 
1 2 3 4 
Purpose for use  Cement 
Wheelbarrowa) Sand  
Wheelbarrowb) Stone  
 Wheelbarrow  
Mortar for plastering  1 6 - 
Mortar for bricklaying  1 6 - 
Concrete for foundations 
and floors  1 3 4 
Cover slab  1 2 2 
a) The volume of 2 packets of cement is equal to the volume of 1 
wheelbarrow of cement  
b)    The type of sand should comply with the pu rpose, i.e. plaster sand for 
plastering, building sand for bricklaying and river or crusher sand for concrete  
 
 
16.4.2  Cover slab  
The cover slab should generally be made of concrete or cement -mortar  
 
16.4.3  Pedestal  
 
The pedestal can be commercially fabricated with cer amic, polyethylene, glass reinforced 
plastic (GRP) and PVC or can be fabricated on site with wood, concrete, mortar or bricks.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   89 
 16.4.4  Superstructure  
 
The walls and roof can be constructed from a variety of local or prefabricated materials 
that are durable and we atherproof.  
 
All hinges. Locks and handles should be of robust construction and resistant to corrosion.  
 
16.4.5  Vent pipe  
 
The vent pipe should be manufactured from uPVC pipe, brick, fibre cement pipe or cast 
iron. 
 
16.4.6  Fly screen  
 
The flyscreen should be resistant t o damage from UV light, rain water and the gases 
emanating from the pit.  
 
16.5 Design and construction of a VIP toilet  
 
16.5.1  Pit 
 
The recommended pit storage volume for a typical household (excluding the freeboard) is 
as given in Table 2.  
 
NOTE   A method for determ ining the pit storage volume as a function of the number of 
people using the pit, the solid accumulation rate and the desired life span of the pit is 
described in the publication Building VIPs: Guidelines for the design and construction of 
domestic ventila ted improved pit toilets . 
 
Freeboard height above the storage volume should be as given in Table 2 and Figure 1.  
 
A pit can be round or rectangular. A round pit is more stable and is recommended in less 
cohesive soils.  
 
For maximum efficiency, a pit should  be large and deep. Round pits with diameter 1  m to 
1,5 m and square pits with a width of 1  m to 1,5  m are the norm. Longer and shallower 
pits are acceptable in the case of rocky areas or areas with a high water table.  
 
If the pit depth cannot be achieved due to rock or groundwater, an alternative such as a 
urine diversion toilet should be considered.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   90 
 The size of the pit and the porosity of the soil surrounding it should be such that water  
will percolate faster out of the pit than liquids entering the pit . 
 
A pit should not penetrate the water table  
 
Only faecal matter, urine and cleansing water should  be allowed to enter the pit.  
 
Separate provision should be made for the disposal of grey -water and other household 
waste.  
 
A drawing of a typical VIP toil et is shown in figure  1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 — Drawing of a typical VIP toilet  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   91 
  
16.5.2  Location  
 
The toilet should be situated downhill and at least 30 m from a borehole or a well (see 
SANS  10252 -2). 
 
The toilet should be near the house but so sited as not to endanger the structure of any 
building or any services on the site or on the border of the site.  
 
The toilet should afford privacy of use by facing towards the house  
 
If practical, more than one potential suitable location should be identified per stand where 
there  is no pit emptying service.  
 
Where the pit will be emptied by a vacuum tanker the toilet should be situated such that a 
vacuum tanker can approach to within 30  m of the toilet   and not more than 2  m above 
the pit.  
 
The toilet should not be built under or  near trees.  
 
16.5.3  Lining  
 
Pits in stable soil which will be emptied by hand or pits moved when full need not be 
lined.  
 
Pits in unstable soils and those that will be emptied by vacuum tanker should be lined.  
 
The lining and soil should be sufficiently porous  to allow water to seep out.  
 
The lining can be constructed from concrete blocks, bricks, cement -stabilised soil blocks, 
stones or mesh -reinforced soil -cement.  
 
16.5.4  Collar  
 
A collar should be installed in all pits to:  
 
a) prevent surface water or soil fines running into the pit;  
b) support the cover slab and the mass of the users; and  
c) support the mass of the superstructure if it rests on the slab.  
 
A collar should be impervious and extend to at least 500 mm below the top of the pit and 
at least 75  mm abov e ground level.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   92 
 A collar should be surrounded by a cement -stabilised earth bank or a shaped earth drain.  
 
The same material that would be used for a lining is suitable for a collar.  
 
16.5.5  Cover slab  
 
The cover slab should generally be made of concrete.  
 
The mi nimum thickness of the slab panel should be as given in Table 2. The mass of the 
slab should not exceed 150kg  (to allow it to be moved by hand).  
 
The reinforcing should be as given in Table 2.  
 
Reinforcing have to be designed for a flat slab exceeding 1,5  m in span.  
 
A cover slab should have two holes to accommodate the pedestal and the vent pipe. The 
shapes and sizes of the holes should correspond with the shapes and sizes of the pedestal 
and the vent pipe.  
 
It can be circular or rectangular.  
 
A cover sla b should be properly supported by the pit lining or pit collar by allowing an 
overlap of at least 75 mm on each side.  
 
Separate panels should be sealed against each other with a weak mortar mixture or 
window putty to obtain a fly -proof joint.  
 
16.5.6  Pedestal and  toilet seat  
 
Some groups may require a squatting plate and not a pedestal.  
 
The pedestal should have a smooth inside surface and be impervious to the penetration of 
water.  
 
Pedestals can be commercially fabricated with ceramic, polyethylene, glass reinfor ced 
plastics (GRP) and uPVC or can be fabricated on site withconcrete, mortar or bricks.  
 
Concrete or mortar pedestals should be painted with a waterproof paint.  
 
The inside walls should be vertical or splayed slightly outwards from top to bottom (to 
minim ize fouling).  
 
The inside walls should be located directly over the pit. A side chute is not recommended.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   93 
 The pedestal height should be between 350  mm and 450  mm. 
 
A toilet seat should be installed. The minimum internal dimensions of an oval seat are 
310 mm and 250  mm and for a round seat the diameter is 250  mm. 
 
The opening in the seat should be smaller than the opening in the pedestal with an 
overlap of at least 10  mm at the front end side and at least 70 mm at the back.  
 
The surfaces of the toilet seat and lid should be smooth and free of obstructions.  
 
The hinges of the seat and lid should be corrosion -resistant.  
 
A gap should be provided between the seat and lid for ventilation purposes.  
 
16.5.7  Superstructure  
 
The superstructure can be rectangular shaped, ci rcular or spiral with or without a privacy 
wall (a screen wall makes a door unnecessary).  
 
The design of the superstructure should ensure privacy, comfort and protection against 
the weather.  
 
The design of the superstructure should allow for emptying the pit, if required. (manually 
or by vacuum).  
 
To reduce load on the cover slab, pit collar or lining, the superstructure can be offset. Any 
part of a wall that extends beyond the edge of the cover slab should be supported by a 
foundation.  
 
The vent pipe may be situated inside or outside of the superstructure.  
 
While the superstructure should allow indirect light to enter, the pit should be kept dark.  
 
The superstructure should be adequately fastened to the cover slab or the foundation.  
 
The roof should be wat erproof and adequately fastened to the walls.  
 
The vent pipe should be adequately fastened to the superstructure.  
 
If the door opens outwards it is more prone to wind damage but the interior floor area can 
be decreased, thus reducing building costs.  
 
The m inimum dimensions of a superstructure should be as given in table  2. 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   94 
 The walls and roof can be constructed from a variety of local or prefabricated materials 
that are durable and weatherproof.  
 
16.6 Ventilation  
 
16.6.1  General  
 
Moving air should be allowed to enter t he superstructure through the vent holes through 
the walls and above the door, through the gap between the lid and seat, through the 
pedestal into the pit and out through the vent pipe.  
 
Ventilation openings should be provided and positioned high up in the  walls or above the 
door (see Figure 2).  
 
The total ventilation opening areas for incoming air should be at least three times the 
cross -sectional area of the vent pipe.  
 
16.6.2  Vent pipe  
 
Wind shear across the vent pipe is the main cause of ventilation in the sys tem. 
 
The vent pipe should have a diameter of at least 110  mm. 
 
The vent pipe should extend at least 500  mm above the highest point of the roof.  
 
16.6.3  Fly screen  
 
The vent pipe should be covered with a mesh to prevent flies entering or leaving the pit.  
 
The me sh should be secured horizontally over the top of the vent pipe.  
 
The openings in the mesh should have a maximum size of 1  mm x 1 mm. Smaller 
openings will cause resistance to free air flow and larger openings allow insects to pass 
through to the pit.  
 
The mesh should be located in such a position that leaves will not accumulate on it.  
 
The mesh should be made of aluminium, stainless steel, glass fibre or other material 
resistant to corrosion from uv light, rust and the gases emanating from the pit.  
 
Cowls should not be used over the vent pipe as they obstruct the light and induce 
turbulence, thereby reducing wind shear at the top of the vent pipe.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   95 
  
 
 
               a) Fly control                                                   b) Ventilation  
The ventilat ion systems  
 
16.6.4  Hand -wash facility  
 
Where a water stand pipe is not available nearby a small water tank should be provided.  
 
 
16.7 Ground water contamination risk associated with a VIP toilet  
 
Unless lined with an impervious lining, on -site sanitation systems, suc h as the VIP Toilet, 
dispose of human waste directly into the ground.  
 
In order to minimise the risk of contaminating ground water sources the guidelines 
provided in the DWAF Ground Water Protocol must be followed.  
 
The DWAF Ground Water Protocol is includ ed in the Ground Water Folder . Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   96 
  
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED MINIMUM DIMENSIONS  
 
Component  Recommended minimum dimensions  
Pit Storage volume:   
         Pit to be emptied  2,0 m3 
         Toilet to be moved  3,0 m3 
          Freeboard:  0,5 m 
Collar  Depth:  500 mm 
 Projection above ground level:  75 mm 
 Slab support width:  75 mm 
Slab Thickness:  75 mm 
 Overlap on collar:  75 mm 
 Reinforcement if span is <  1,5 m:  
      In underside of slab   
      Concrete cover over reinforcement  25 mm  
  Type: 8  mm bars, 250  c/c each way, or   
             Ref 193 steel mesh, or   
             4 mm roofing wire, 150  c/c  
Pedestal  Height from floor:  350 mm to 
450 mm 
Seat openingb)  Round  250 mm diameter  
 Oval  310 mm X  250 
mm 
Superstructurec) Internal height:  1,9 m 
(on site 
constructed)  Internal width:  0,9 m 
 Internal length, door opening outwards:  1,2 m 
 Internal length, door opening inwards:  2,0 m 
 Dimension between pedestal and door opening 
outwards  0,6 m  
Door  Height:  1,5 m 
 Width:  0,7 m 
Vent pipe  Diamet er: 110 mm 
 Extending above roof:  500 mm 
Fly screen  Openings:  1 mm x 1  mm 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   97 
  
17 STAFF, HOUSING, LABO RATORIES, AND 
OTHER FACILITIES  
 
 
17.1 Staff requirements for water supply schemes  
 
Once a scheme has been planned and the basic designs of the various components  are 
known, a staffing structure must be developed. This will depend on the nature of the 
works (i.e. water or sewage) and on the components which are to be operated and 
maintained. Staff within the operating organisation who have spare capacity must be ke pt 
in mind so as not to burden the organisation unnecessarily.  
 
The components for which staff must be considered are:  
 
 The raw water source, i.e. borehole(s), dam, river pump station, and pipelines.  
 The treatment works.  
 The main distribution system and re servoirs.  
 Reticulation . 
 Laboratory.  
 Stores.  
 Administration.  
 Meter reading, billing and collecting revenue.  
 
Where a borehole, fitted with a hand pump or a windmill, is provided and user ownership 
resides in the community, individual members of the communit y will have to operate the 
pump as they require water. In the case of the windmill a few people can be responsible 
for monitoring tank levels and releasing or applying the brake when necessary. Someone 
within the community needs to be trained to service th e pumps/windmill at regular 
intervals or these services should be provided from outside.  
 
Where one or more boreholes equipped with an engine are involved a permanent 
"operator" is required to monitor reservoir levels, start and stop the engine, check fuel , oil 
and water levels, generally ensure the well -being of the engine, procure the fuel and call 
for specialised maintenance when needed.   
 
In a case similar to the above where chlorination is applied the operator should receive 
additional training in con trolling the chlorination system.  
 
Where water is abstracted from a river, chlorinated and pumped to a reservoir from where 
it is reticulated to the community an operator will be necessary with appropriate training 
in pumps diesel/petrol engines or electri c motors. Depending on the length of pipelines Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   98 
 and extent of the reticulation, number of standpipes etc. an additional person may be 
needed to help with maintenance.  
 
Any water supply scheme/or sewage disposal system where a treatment works as defined 
in the Water Act forms part of the system will fall under Regulation R2834 of 1985 and 
such works will have to be registered with DWAF and will have to employ operators of 
the requisite grading. These regulations are included in the Legislation and Policy 
Folder. These regulations only stipulate the minimum number of operators needed to 
meet the law. In every case this minimum must be compared with the number of 
operators physically required to man the works at all times during its operation. Where 
any works i s to operate continuously, for example, at least 4 operators will be required to 
allow for days off and sick and vacational leave. Besides the operating staff for the 
treatment process, additional operating staff for dams and pump stations etc., as well as  
maintenance staff may be required. Depending on the overall length and diameters of the 
pipelines involved the number and size of maintenance teams will need to be decided. It 
is recommended that there be at least 1 team per 10 km of pipeline with the siz e of teams 
as follows:  
 
DIAMETER OF PIPE    SIZE OF TEAM  
 
<75mm       2 
75 - 100mm       3 
100 - 300mm       4 
300 - 800mm       5 
>800mm       6 
 
The amount and type of equipment installed will dictate whether full time mechanical and 
electrical artisans need t o be employed or whether such services can be contracted out.  
 
The extent of the buildings and structured will determine the number of civil maintenance 
staff needed and the number of cleaners needed.  
 
The size of the treatment plant and complexity of the process employed will determine 
whether full time laboratory staff are required. Usually they would only be necessary on a 
Class "B" or higher works.  
 
As the size of a treatment plant and/or the major pipelines and reticulation increases, so 
does the numbe r of supporting staff. Stores are of major importance and a Class "C" or 
higher works should be provided with a storeman.  
 
Where billing and tariff collection is to be the responsibility of the scheme itself, 
provision must be made for meter readers (when meters are installed) and for clerks and a 
cashier.  
 
Financial arrangements need to be made with the WSA to facilitate payments for fuel or 
electricity and chemicals.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   99 
  
17.2 Housing requirement for water supply schemes  
 
The necessity of providing housing for a s cheme will depend on the following:  
 Location of works and distance from town.  
 Type of storage, water care and pumping facilities and whether they require 
constant attention.  
 Existing staff of service provider and where they are housed.  
 
At the smaller wate r supply schemes, i.e. those involving boreholes, pumps and 
chlorination only, and where the level of skill required for the operation and maintenance 
can be found within the community, housing associated with the scheme should not be 
necessary.  
 
At larger  schemes, where skills required cannot be found within the community to be 
served and where skills must therefore be procured from elsewhere, consideration must 
be given to providing housing for the staff required to perform certain duties such as 
process control, skilled electrical and mechanical maintenance and computerized billing 
systems.  
 
The houses will need to be similar in size and finish to the standards expected by persons 
of the relevant post grading. Generally, however, it is preferable to minim ize the different 
types of housing. This reduces housing related problems when personnel are transferred 
or promoted.  
 
Where housing is provided, problems may arise in cases where it is necessary to 
terminate the services of employees.  
 
Geographical aspect s can be a reason to provide housing for all staff members, such cases 
arise where a scheme may be located in an isolated area in order to be near a large dam 
and where transport infrastructure is minimal.  
 
In all cases where housing is provided, the econo mies of providing the houses against 
providing a transport allowance should be considered in conjunction with the 
inconvenience factors which arise. While providing on site housing is convenient for 
staff, problems arise in providing schooling for children  etc. 
 
A charge is normally levied where housing is provided and should this be regarded as too 
high it is likely that staff may choose lower standards of housing at cheaper rates, 
privately.  
 
There may be tax implications (perks tax) for employers who rec eive free housing.  
 
Providing a subsidy for workers to own their own housing should be seen as preferable as 
this builds stability in communities.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   100 
  
Consideration should be given to the following:  
 The installation of security fencing around the housing.  
 The provision of security lighting like street lighting or high -mast lighting.  
 The provision of an electricity meter for each house.  
 The provision of one or more communal telephones.  
 
17.3 Laboratories, offices and other facilities  
 
Laboratory or on -site analysis of water may be performed as a means of plant and system 
control or adjustment and as a periodic check on water quality. Routine testing of water is 
designed to establish that the water is aesthetically acceptable and hygienic. These tests 
may be carried o ut with relatively simple equipment, titrations, colour comparison or 
simple robust instrumentation such as pH measurement.  
 
Any water supply scheme such as a borehole or a river pump station where chlorine is 
added to the water should be provided with a chlorine test kit and the necessary reagents. 
The recommended equipment is a Lovibond comparator with a chlorine disc B/40A and 
DPD tablets.  
 
On a small scheme where lime is added a test kit such as that for chlorine, but with a pH 
disc and reagents should  be provided.  Alternatively a simple robust PH meter may be 
used.  
 
Suitable testing equipment and testing frequency for a small water treatment plant that 
produces <1M1/d are indicated in the table below:  
 
PARAMETERS  EQUIPMENT  FREQUENCY  REMARKS  
PH PH met er Daily  If lime is added  
Turbidity  Turbidity meter  Daily  If flocculants are 
added  
Colour  Colour comparator  Daily   
Chlorine:  
 
Total residual  
 
Free residual   
 
Chlorine comparator  
 Once a day  
 
At least twice a day  
 When gas chlorine 
is used.  
When chlorine  
tablets or solutions 
are used.  
Flocculation  Laboratory jar 
stirrer  When necessary  When replacing 
flocculant with a 
new one or when 
the nature of the raw 
water changes  
 
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   101 
 Conductivity  
TDS  
E-coli 
Total hardness  
Calcium hardness  
Magnesium 
hardness  
Total al kalinity  
Sulphates  
Chlorides  
Fluorides  
Nitrates  
Iron 
Manganese  
  
These tests can be 
contracted out or 
performed by a 
nearby larger 
facility.   
In accordance with 
the water quality 
monitoring 
schedule.   
Alternatively when 
there is pollution or 
suspicion of 
pollution in the area.  
Note: Potable water should comply with SANS 241. See Chapter 9 for Water Treatment 
plants.  
 
Suitable testing equipment and testing frequency for a water treatment plant which 
produces between 1M1/d and 5Ml/d s are listed in the table  below:  
 
PARAMETER  EQUIPMENT  FREQUENCY  REMARKS  
PH PH meter  Daily   
Turbidity  Turbidity meter  Daily   
Colour  Colour comparator  Daily   
Chlorine:  
 
Total residual  
Free residual  
  
 
Chlorine comparator  Once a day  
 
At least twice a day  When gas chlorine 
is used . 
When chlorine 
tablets or solutions 
are used.  
 
E-coli Incubator  Weekly   
Conductivity  Conductivity meter  Daily   
TDS  Weighing  
Balance/Calculations  Weekly   
Total hardness  
Calcium hardness  
Magnesium 
hardness  
Total alkalinity   
Titrations:Burettes   
Daily  
  
Stability test  Calculations  Daily   
Flocculation test  Laboratory jar stirrer  When necessary  When replacing 
flocculant with a 
new one or when 
the nature of the raw 
water changes.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   102 
 Sulphate  
Chlorides  
Fluorides  
Nitrates  
Iron 
Manganese  These tests can be 
contracted out or 
performed by a 
nearby facility.  Once a month or 
every two months.  Iron and Manganese 
may be analysed for 
on a frequent basis, 
where these are 
known to occur. 
Other specific 
metals may need to 
be determined when 
there are industrial 
or mining  activities 
in the vicinity.  
 
A complete laboratory as per list below should be provided for a water treatment plant 
which produces >5M1/d. Support laboratory equipment such as weighing balance, hot 
plates, filters, vacuum pumps, stirrers and burners will  also be required.  
 
PARAMETERS  METHOD/  
EQUIPMENT  FREQUENCY  REMARKS  
PH PH meter  Daily   
Turbidity  Turbidity meter  Daily   
Colour  Colour comparator  Daily   
Chlorine  
 
Total residual:  
Free residual   
 
Chlorine comparator  Once a day  
 
At least twice a 
day 
 When gas chlorine is 
used.  
When chlorine tablets or 
solutions are used.  
E-coli Incubator  Daily   
Conductivity  Conductivity meter  Daily   
TDS  Weighing balance/  
Calculations  Weekly   
Total hardness  
Calcium hardness  
Magnesium 
hardness  
Total alkalinity   
Titrations   
Daily   
Flocculation test  Laboratory jar 
stirrer  When necessary  When replacing 
flocculant with a new 
one or when the nature 
of the raw water 
changes.  
Stability test  Calculations  Daily   
 
 
 
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   103 
 Sulphates  
 
Chlorides  
Fluorides  
Nitrates  
Iron 
Manganese  Turbidi ty/ 
Gravimetric  
Titration  
Spectrometry  
Spectrometry  
Spectrometry  
Spectrometry   
 
 
Weekly  
 Iron and Manganese 
may be analysed for on a 
frequent basis, where 
these are known to 
occur. Other specific 
metals may need to be 
determined when there 
are industrial o r mining 
activities in the vicinity..  
 
Laboratories, workshops and other facilities should be available at the time of scheme 
commissioning. Sufficient funds should be allowed in the project budget for the start up 
costs of these facilities.  
 
17.4 Non-fixed as sets 
 
Non-fixed assets such as loose tools, laboratory fittings, and workshop equipment should 
be provided as part of the implementation cost.  
 
The number of vehicles needs to be determined carefully according to the requirement 
and sharing possibilities.  
 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   104 
  
18 TENDER PROCEDURES  
 
 
Each Municipality must have their own Tender Procedures. However DWAF Tender 
Procedures are provided here as a guideline.  
 
18.1 Limitations  
 
This section applies mainly to Civil Contracts, and is only applicable to tenders for new 
scheme s being controlled by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.  
 
For Mechanical/Electrical Contracts the Mechanical/Electrical Engineering Directorate 
must be consulted.  
 
Where State Funds are involved, the Departmental Tender Procedures as prescribed in the 
Accounting Officer’s Procurement Procedures must be used.  
 
18.2 Steps in the tendering process  
 
The tendering process comprise the following steps:  
 Approval of Business Plan . 
 Detailed survey  work starts.  
 Detailed design  work starts.  
 Conceptual Design Rep ort submitted to DWAF Pretoria.  
 Design Meeting:  consultants meet with DWAF Pretoria design team.  
 Update on Conceptual Design Report . 
 Draft Tender documents with drawings  (3 copies prepared and forwarded to 
DWAF Pretoria).  
 Update Tender Documents : 13 copies  plus marked up draft sent to DWAF 
Pretoria.  
 Approval: Original Tender Documents sent around to relevant officials of DWAF 
Pretoria for signature.  
 Original copy plus 12 other copies sent to  Departmental Control Committee for 
approval.  
 Call for tender adver tised  in Government Tender Bulletin (Friday).  
Advertisement period should be 28 days.  
 Tenderers obtain Tender Documents from Tender Office situated at the entrance 
of zwaMadaka Building.  
 Compulsory site visit . 
 Contractors calculate prices, fees and total cost of their bid for constructing the 
project.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   105 
  Sealed tenders submitted  before due date.  Tenders up to an unlimited amount 
close at the Department.  
 Tender box closed  at specific time (Wednesday at 11h00).  
 Tender box opened in public and details of tender s received recorded.  
Adjudication of tenders  by consultant.  
Submission of Adjudication Report  to RDP coordinator.  
Adjudication Report accepted and contractor assigned to project . 
Contractor starts work.  
 
 
18.3 Pre- tender stage  
 
The pre -tender stage includes al l work up to the submission of the tender documents for 
approval by the Regional Tender Committee or the Departmental Control Committee, as 
appropriate.  
 
This stage includes:  
 Preliminary proposals (dealt with under Section C: Civil Design).  
 Design Reports (dealt with under Section C: Civil Design).  
 Draft Tender Documents.  
 Final Tender Document.  
 Drawings (dealt with under Section C: Civil Design).  
 Tender Procedures.  
 All reviewed and approved by Directorates: Civil Design and 
Mechanical/Electrical Engineering  as appropriate.  
 
18.4 Draft tender documents  
 
18.4.1  Compilation of draft tender document  
 
All tender documents must be prepared in English.  
 
It is recommended that Consultants familiarize themselves with the general requirements 
of the General Conditions of Tender, Contract and Order.  
 
On completion of the designs, unless otherwise specified, two draft copies of the tender 
document, based on the standard DWAF format for either:  
 supply/ or installation only, or  
 supply, installation and commissioning of mechanical/elec trical/civil plants,  
 are to be submitted to the Director: Civil Design or M/E Engineering for his 
comments and approval.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   106 
 The General Conditions of Contract as amended from time to time are applicable. Civil 
Design and Mechanical/Electrical Engineering mus t be consulted to determine which 
general conditions are applicable.  
 
Various standard forms and specifications as indicated in the standard DWAF format, are 
to be included in the tender documents, i.e.:  
 Special conditions of contract which should not be a ltered or modified by the 
Consulting Engineer without the approval of the Department.  
 Preference should be given to the use of South African National Standards 
(SANS) as drawn up by the South African Bureau of Standards.  
 Penalties or damages must be determ ined as described in the General Conditions 
of Contract and or Clause 32.5.2 of the General Conditions of Tender, Contract 
and Order. For smaller contracts the formula gives and insignificant amount and 
the penalty must be determined in collaboration with the Director: Civil Design or 
M/E Engineering and Sub -directorate: Contract Administration. When valves for 
example are supplied under a separate contract for a pipeline, reservoir, etc., late 
deliveries can have a significant influence on the construction  and completion of 
the contract. If the late completion of the contract may result in claims from other 
Contractors against the Department, this must be taken into consideration when 
determining the penalty.  
 
18.4.2  Standard format of a DWAF tender document  
 
The standard format of a Departmental tender document is provided below. The 
consultant may rearrange the format:  
 
 DWAF Tender Front page (DW 106)  
 Invitation to Tender (C2)  
 Tax Clearance Certificate (C3)  
 Locality Plan  
 Notice of Site Inspection  
 Site Inspection Certificate  
 Instructions to Tenderers  
 Form of Tender  
 Appendix  
 Important Conditions: Miscellaneous Requirements (C 6)  
 Tender Commitment form (C4)  
 Form Preference Points Claim:  General Conditions and Definitions (C9)  
Compulsory  
 Form Preference Points Syste m:  (C9.1, C9.2)  
 Form Preference Points System:  Equity Ownership by HDI’s (C9.6)  
Compulsory  
 Form Preference Points System:  Procuring Locally Manufactured Products 
(C9.7)  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   107 
  Form Preference Points System:  The Promotion of Small Businesses (C9.8)  
 Declaratio n of Interest (C10)  
 Questionnaire (C8)  
 Credit Order Instruction (C11)  
 Agreement  
 Deed of Suretyship  
 Schedule of Similar Work Undertaken by Tenderer  
 Schedule of Proposed Sub -Contractors  
 Special Conditions of Contract  
 Alterations by Tenderer  
 Project Specifica tion (Including Project Manufacture and Installation Schedule)  
 Particular Specifications  
 Schedule of Quantities  
 Daywork Schedule  
 List of provisional amounts, for example allowances for escalation.  
 The National Industrial Participation Programme (NIPP)  [wh ere appropriate for 
large import content contracts]  
 
18.4.3  Departmental tender and contract forms (C -forms)  
 
The following Departmental Tender and Contract Forms should be included in the tender 
document:  
 Form C2:  Invitation to Tender.  
 Form C3:  Tax Clearance C ertificate.  
 Form C6:  Important Conditions: Miscellaneous requirements.  
 Form C4:  Tender Commitment Form.  
 Form C8:  Questionnaire.  
 Form Preference Points Claim:  General Conditions and Definitions (C9)  
Compulsory  
 Form Preference Points System:  (C9.1, C9. 2) 
 Form Preference Points System:  Equity Ownership by HDI’s (C9.6)  
Compulsory  
 Form Preference Points System:  Procuring Locally Manufactured Products 
(C9.7)  
 Form Preference Points System:  The Promotion of Small Businesses (C9.8)  
 Form C10:  Declaration o f Interest.  
Credit Order Instruction (C11)  
 
Original copies of the C forms can be obtained from the Tender Office situated at the 
entrance of zwaMadaka Building and may not be retyped.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   108 
  
18.4.4  Departmental formats  
 
The following Departmental Formats are availabl e and should be included in the Tender 
Document:  
 Instructions to Tenderers (The Consultant may add additional instructions).  
 Special Conditions of Contract and its Appendix.  
 
18.4.5  Standard proformas  
 
The following proformas should be the standard pro forma form s of the “General 
Conditions of Contract 1990”.  
 Alterations by tenderer.  
 Tender.  
 Agreement.  
 Deed of Suretyship.  
 
18.4.6  Other proformas  
 
The following should be included in the contract document:  
 Preamble to the Schedule of Quantities.  
 Daywork Schedule.  
 Schedule of Proposed Sub -Contractors.  
 Schedule of Similar Work.  
 
The Consultant may use his own forms or the Standard forms of the Department.  
 
No allowance for price variation or contingencies may be included in the tender.  
 
Amount of Suretyship (Civil Contracts)  
 
The following is recommended:  
For contracts with a value in excess of R5 million the amount of suretyship shall be 10%.  
For contracts with a value equal to R3 million, but less than R5 million the amount of 
suretyship shall be as follows:  
The greater valu e of: 
Value of fixed charge and value related items in Schedule of Quantities  
Or 
If value of contract is R150 000 or less: 0%  
If value of contract is more than R150 000 but less than R1 million: 2,5%  
If value of contract is more than R1 million but less or  equal to R3 million: 5%  
If the value of the contract is more than R3 million but less than R5 million: 6% - 10% 
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   109 
 18.4.7  Final tender document  
 
After incorporation of the comments of the Department into the final document, thirteen 
copies shall be forwarded to th e Tender Office, under cover of a letter which must also 
give the total estimated cost of the contract, together with expected expenditures for each 
financial year.  
 
An advertisement, completed on the standard Departmental form, giving the date of 
advertis ement, details of the site inspection, deposit to be paid by the Tenderers for a set 
of documents, closing date of the tender, etc. must also accompany this letter.  
 
The following deposit structure is recommended:  
 
the invitation of tenders above R150 000,  00 and up to R500 000, 00 a non -refundable 
deposit will be R50, 00;  
between R500 000, 00 and up to R1 million a non -refundable deposit of R100, 00;  and  
for the invitation of tenders in excess of R1 million a R200, 00 non -refundable deposit.  
 
Please note that no tender deposits are allowed on the invitation of price quotations up to 
R150 000, 00 per case as well as on the invitation of proposals for professional services.  
 
The date of the site meeting for major civil and building contracts shall be arrange d in 
consultation with the office of the South African Federation of Civil Engineering 
Contractors or the Master Builders Association in the case of building contracts.  
 
18.5 Tender procedure  
 
Approximately two weeks after the tender document has been approved for publication 
by the Departmental Control Committee, the tender will be advertised in the Government 
Tender Bulletin.  If required, advertisements can also be placed in the press. Tenders 
must close at the appropriate DWAF office.  
 
Tender documents will only be issued by the tender section of the Department on 
payment of the prescribed non -refundable deposit.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   110 
  
18.6 Tender stage  
 
The tender stage includes all work from the advertisement of the tender until the issue of 
the order.  
 
18.6.1  Site inspection  
 
All informat ion, clarification of clauses in the documents given by the Consultant and 
questions lodged by any tenderer at the site inspection, together with the answers, shall be 
recorded and sent to all tenderers as an addendum. It is to be stated clearly that the a bove 
will form an integral part of the tender documentation and tenderers must sign acceptance 
thereof and submit the said addendum together with their tenders. The addendum must be 
approved and counter signed by the Regional Director before it is distribu ted to the 
tenderers.  Any other addendums shall be distributed in the same manner and must also 
be included in the tender. All addendums will be regarded as an integral part of the tender 
document.  
 
18.6.2  Extension of tender period  
 
Before granting and extensio n to the tender period it shall be discussed with and 
approved by the Tender Section, who will then inform the Government Tender Bulletin 
in writing of the new closing date of the tender. Consulting Engineers shall then advise 
the tenderers in writing by m eans of a telex or fax of the new closing date.  Clause 12.4 of 
the General Conditions of Tender, Contract and Order must be adhered to.  
 
18.6.3  Adjudication of tenders  
 
After the closing of the tenders, the Tender Office will forward the tenders to the 
Regional Director.  A duplicate copy of the tenders plus all correspondence shall be 
collected by hand from the Regional Director by the Consulting Engineer.  
 
Consulting Engineers may not obtain any additional prices or rates from any tenderer 
during the adjudicati on period. Communication, except for technical clarification, with 
the tenderers should be avoided, and then only with the approval of the Regional 
Director.  
 
The Consulting Engineer must submit a detailed report recommending, with full 
motivation, the acc eptance of a tender as soon as possible, but not later than three weeks 
after receipt of the tenders from the Department. This recommendation plus all copies of 
the tenders including the correspondence shall be returned to the Regional Director, by 
hand.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   111 
  
The report shall include a Schedule of Tenders with comparative prices and a technical 
summary of the offers received.  
 
18.6.4  Acceptance of a tender  
 
Based on the Consultant’s report the Department will check for any discrepancies 
between the “ORIGINAL” and “DUP LICATE COPY” of the tenders and draw up and 
submit a recommendation to the appropriate committee for approval. The Departmental 
Control Committee meets once per week, on a Monday at 12h00.  Recommendations 
and/or specifications which must serve before the DCC must reach the Tender Office not 
later than a Wednesday at 12h00.  When the tender recommendation has been approved, 
the Tender Office will send a Letter of Acceptance (C17) to the successful Tenderer.  The 
Consulting Engineer will be advised and the o fficial tender order will subsequently be 
issued by the Regional Director.  
 
The “Tender” becomes a “Contract” with the letter of acceptance.  
 
Rejection of all tenders or cancellation, but before approval by the DCC/RTC  
 
A recommendation to reject all tende rs or to cancel the tender must be referred to the 
relevant Director for approval of the cancellation.  
 
18.6.5  Sureties and insurances  
 
The sureties or guarantees and insurance policies that must be provided by the Contractor 
in accordance with the General Condit ions of Contract and Clause 45 of the General 
Conditions of Tender, Contract and Order shall on receipt thereof from the Contractor, 
firstly be checked for correctness, and then sent to the Regional Director.  
 
18.6.6  Signing of the contract  
 
For all major contrac ts the “Form of Agreement” must be signed in duplicate by the 
Contractor and relevant Managing Engineer of the Department on behalf of the 
Employer.  
 
Two documents must be book bound for signature. Only the agreement must be signed. It 
is not necessary to initial each page.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   112 
  
18.6.7  Award meeting  
 
Immediately after the award of a contract the Consulting Engineer must arrange a 
meeting between responsible representatives of the Employer, the Consulting Engineer 
and the Contractor to clarify the scope of the contrac t and matters of procedure and to 
hand over the site to the Contractor.  
 
18.7 Mechanical tender preparation guidelines  
 
18.7.1  Document preparation - broad outline  
 
Mechanical tender documents shall comprise the following in broad outline:  
 
General specification relat ing to components, items and services which generally occur in 
pump stations, including the crane or hoist.  
 
Project specification describing the specific project first in general terms and then in 
specific detail.  
 
Technical schedule similar to the Bill o f Quantities, but limited to specifying and/or 
inquiring of the tenderer only the technicalities of the equipment offered.  
 
Form of Guarantee relating to pump, motor and pumpset performance.  
 
Price schedule comprising tender price broken down into just a f ew major groupings and 
detailed items as deemed necessary for financial control of the contract.  
 
Note:  
 
The Mechanical engineering component of a pump station contract, unlike its Electrical 
and Civil engineering counterparts, does not employ a Bill of Qu antities because very 
little of the equipment offered is of a repetitive or "measured" nature.  It is not necessary 
to cost out each little pipe piece or nut, bolt and gasket.  
 
Furthermore, a "payment by progressive measurement" of works completed by month  
end is not a meaningful control device. A method of payment against measurable goals 
achieved and relating to specific items of equipment as highlighted in the original 
document price schedule is employed.  Progress payments per item are limited to up to 
80% of tender value when delivered to site, with a further 10% making up 90% of both 
item cost and installation when equipment is ready for commissioning. Successful 
commissioning initiates the Guarantee Period (either 12 or 24 months). The final 10% of Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   113 
 Contract Value is withheld as retention money and may be released only after the 
satisfactory completion of the Guarantee Period, signaled by the Final Certificate.  
 
A "Performance Bond" for 10% of the order value, is held until the Final Certificate is 
issued. 
 
18.7.2  Specific points to be noted  
 
The pump and motor (the pumpset mounted on a single baseplate) are costed in the same 
schedule and are considered to be a single entity.  
The pump duty and station duty are specified as a primary factor in the compilation o f the 
Project Specification - not hidden somewhere in a bill of quantities.  
No specific pump manufacturer, pump size or model may be assumed. The specification 
must therefore clearly define how the motor is to be sized with at least 15% over -capacity 
safet y margin. Pump and motor performance efficiency and power demand shall be 
guaranteed by the contractor.  
Brand names may not be referred to under any circumstances when describing items in 
the specification.  Performance requirements shall be fully specifie d. 
Pump motor, flow meters and any other sensing instrumentation shall be part of the 
Mechanical Specification.  
 
18.8 Electrical tender  
 
The following must be included in all electrical tender documents issued for CWSS 
projects.  
 No brand names and/or type numbe rs are allowed.  
 The electrical scope and limits of contract must be clearly defined.  
 The tenderers must be informed as to how and where the electricity is supplied 
and metered.  
 An electrical and control function analysis must be provided.  
 A line diagram of  the system must be provided. This must indicate the existing 
layout as well as that required by the contract.  
 One drawing showing the overall electrical earthing system is required.  
 The Department’s Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Directorate’s Gene ral 
Technical Specifications (Electrical) (GTSE) must form part of the document. 
These are available in printed form as well as on electronic media.  
 Transformer and cable sizes must be clearly indicated.  
 There must be an electrical project specification th at describes the requirements of 
the tender. This must cover the MV (if any) and LT panels, the motor control 
center, an earthing system, lighting protection and building power and lights etc. 
These must be clearly set out to enable the tenderer to select the relevant parts of 
the GTSE that apply to the contract.  
 Only include those sections of the GTSE that applies to the specific project.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   114 
  
18.9 Procurement of a professional team  
 
The latest version of DWAF’s Policy for the appointment of Professional Service 
Providers (PSP’s) should be followed. Special attention should be given to the respective 
fee limitations for competitive bid and tender.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   115 
  
19 CONTRACT ADMINISTRAT ION  
 
 
Each Municipality must have their own contract administration systems. DWAF’s system 
is given here as a guide.  
 
19.1 Payment certificates  
 
Payment certificates, certified for payment by the Consultant must be forwarded 
timeously to the Regional Director who must be consulted beforehand on the payment 
procedure.  
 
The payment certificate must be struc tured as set out below and must contain the 
following information for each item of the schedule of quantities:  
 
 The item number with a short description.  
 The unit of measurement.  
 The billed quantities.  
 The previously measured quantity.  
 The quantity for the  month.  
 The total quantity measured to date.  
 The rate of payment.  
 The total amount claimed.  
 
All variation orders, day -works claims and extras must be listed and referenced at the end 
of the certificate.  
 
The certificate must also be accompanied by a summa ry sheet containing the aggregates 
of all the individual sections, day -works and variation orders, as well as materials on site, 
price variation and other miscellaneous items.  
 
An original VAT invoice must accompany all payment certificates.  
 
Actual disbur sements should be captured on the Department's Financial Management 
System. Operating and Capital costs should be recorded separately and not confused with 
one another.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   116 
  
19.2 Correspondence  
 
Where Consulting Engineers are employed to supervise the construction  of works of a 
civil engineering and building nature or a mechanical/electrical contract executed by a 
private contractor the following shall apply:  
 
Copies of all correspondence must be forwarded to the Regional Director.  
All matters relating to design as pects of the works shall be referred to the Regional 
Director and copies of correspondence, reports, etc. must be sent to the Regional 
Director.  
 
19.3 Estimated costs  
 
The following procedure must be followed:  
 The estimated cost of the contract together with ex pected expenditures for each 
financial year must be submitted to the Department under covering letter with the 
Final Tender Document.  
 After the award of a tender, the Consulting Engineer must submit an estimate of 
the total value of the contract including all additional costs that can be foreseen at 
that time, subdivided into annual expenditures if the duration of the contract 
extends over more than one financial year.  
 On larger works where more than one contract is involved, a table setting out the 
anticip ated expenditure for the whole project or works controlled by the 
Consulting Engineer, must be submitted initially and updated during April of each 
year. During January of each year an estimate must, after consultation with the 
Contractors, be made and sub mitted to the Regional Director, giving the value of 
the payment certificates for which payment will be required before 31 March of 
that year.  
 
19.4 Variation orders  
 
For alterations, additions and omissions to the contract the Consulting Engineer shall 
follow the procedures as set out in the General Conditions of Contract. The following 
procedures must also be adopted:  
 
The nature and up to what value a variation order may be issued by the Consulting 
Engineer without prior reference to the Regional Director wil l be specified in the special 
conditions of contract. All variation orders must however be referred to the Regional 
Director for his final approval.  
 
All variation orders involving substantial changes in design or specifications must be 
referred to the Reg ional Director. In these instances the Consulting Engineer must obtain Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   117 
 a written quotation from the Contractor and determine whether the price is reasonable 
before reference to the Regional Director. The quotation and recommendation can be 
dealt with per f acsimile if urgent, but must be followed by the Contractor’s original 
signed quotation. The Consulting Engineer shall not instruct the Contractor to proceed 
until he has obtained approval from the Regional Director.  
 
All variation orders must be submitted on an approved standardised form and 
consecutively numbered.  
 
Variation orders must be kept up to date and submitted for approval within one month 
after occurrence of the event.  
 
19.5 Co-ordination  
 
Since most Departmental projects involve more than one contrac t as well as works 
executed Departmentally, regular co -ordinating meetings shall be held between the 
parties involved with the Consulting Engineers responsible represented. The Consulting 
Engineers will normally be required to minute all meetings with Cont ractors and must 
forward copies to all parties involved including the Regional Director.  
 
19.6 Construction reports  
 
The Consulting Engineer will be required to submit a Monthly Construction Report or 
Progress Report.  
 
Where dams requiring dam safety regulation s are involved or for the larger schemes,  
proposed pro -forma of the construction report is available from the Chief Engineer: 
Contract Administration. The reports must be in such a format that at the end of the 
contract the monthly reports must be in boun d together with the final covering report to 
constitute the Final Construction Report. Under certain circumstances (dam safety 
requirements) the Engineer will be required to submit a separate consolidated Final 
Construction Report.  
 
19.7 Inspections  
 
19.7.1  Civil work s 
 
General  
 
On completion of a contract, but prior to the issuing of the Certificate of Practical 
Completion, a joint site inspection shall be held. On completion of the list of outstanding 
items compiled at this inspection the Consultant may issue the Cer tificate of Practical Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   118 
 Completion in terms of Clause 54 of the General Conditions of Contract to the 
Contractor.  
 
At the end of the maintenance period the works shall once again be inspected to establish 
whether any defects have to be corrected by the Contr actor.  
 
These inspections shall be attended by the Contractor and the Consulting Engineer and 
representatives of the following Directorates of this Department:  
 Construction  
 Civil Design  
 Mechanical/Electrical Engineering  
 Water Utilisation  
 Regional Office  
 
When it has been established that the Contractor has fulfilled all his obligations in terms 
of the contract, the “FINAL APPROVAL CERTIFICATE” may be issued in terms of 
Clause 55 of the General Conditions of Contract and the last retention monies released.  
 
Dams  
 
The behaviour of the dam structure and ancillary works shall be monitored during the 
construction and during the first filling as required by the Director: Civil Design.  
 
Mechanical and electrical works  
 
The following procedure shall be adopted:  
 
While commissioning is in progress, the Contractor in conjunction with the Consulting 
Engineer will be expected to train the Water Services Provider’s (Water Board or Local 
Government) staff in the normal operation of the plant installed. The training shall be 
done with the aid of operation and maintenance manuals which shall be compiled and 
provided by the Consulting Engineer and/or the Contractor as required by the Director: 
M/E Engineering.  
 
When commissioning has been satisfactorily achieved, acceptance t ests on site will be 
carried out by the Contractor, in the presence of the Consulting Engineer and 
representatives of the Water Services Provider (Water Board or Local Government), the 
Regional Director and of the Mechanical/Electrical Engineering, Civil D esign and Water 
Utilisation Directorates.  
 
The Engineer will subsequently recommend that the plant be taken over from the 
Contractor, by way of a commissioning certificate whereby the Water Service Provider 
(Water Board or Local Government) also agrees to be responsible for the operation of the 
plant. At this time the guarantee period (normally twelve months) commences during 
which period the Contractor must meet any outstanding obligations.  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure 119 Prior to the expiry of the guarantee period, an on-site inspection will be held where the 
Consulting Engineer, the Contractor, the Water Services Provider (Water Board or Local 
Government) and the Directorates: Mechanical/Electrical Engineering, Civil Design and 
Water Utilisation and the Regional Office will be represented. When it has been shown 
that the Contractor has fulfilled all his obligations, the Final Certificate must be issued 
together with the release of the last retention monies. Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   120 
  
20 REPORTING ON OPERATI ONS  
 
 
20.1 Annual scheme audit and water balance  
 
The Regulati ons prepared in terms of S9 of the Water Services Act require a Water 
Services Authority to include a water services audit in its annual report on the 
implementation of its water services development plan. The annual report on the WSDP 
is required in terms  of section 18(1) of the Act.  
 
The Regulations also require a Water Services Authority to undertake an annual water 
balance every month.  
 
The S9 Regulations are included in the Legislation and Policy Folder.  Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   121 
  
21 CONTENTS OF FOLDERS  
 
 
21.1 Legal and policy folder  
 
 Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996(Act 108 of 1996)  
 Water Services Act, 1997(Act 108 of 1997)  
 National Water Act, 1998(Act 36 of 1998)  
 Municipal Systems Act, 2000(Act 32 of 2000)  
 Municipal Structures Act, 2000(Act 33 of 2000)  
 Public Finan ce Management Act, 1999(Act 1 of 1999)  
 Local Government Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act 56 of 2003)  
 Division of Revenue Act -Enacted Annually  
 Strategic Framework for Water Services, September 2003  
 White Paper on Sanitation, September 2001  
 Regul ations under S9 of the Water Services Act, 1997  
 Regulations under S10 of the Water Services Act, 1997  
 Regulations under S 19 of the Water Services Act, 1997  
 Model Water Services Bylaws. Section 21(1) of the Water Services Act, 1997  
 
21.2 Institutional folder  
 
 Terms of reference (TOR) for assessing Water Services Provider options under 
S78 of the Municipal Systems Act  
 Model Water Services Contract between DM and LM  
 
21.3 Planning folder  
 WSDP preparation guide  
 
21.4 Design specifications folder  
 
 See Design Specifications Se ction for full list  
 
21.5 SANS folder  
 
 SANS specification numbering list  
 Guidelines for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure   122 
 21.6 Drawing folder  
 
 BOT Drawings  
 Standard Drawings  
 
CAD software is required to read these drawings.  
 
21.7 Procurement folder  
 
 DWAF Policy for the Appointment of Professional Service Providers  
 DWAF Accounting Officer’s procurement procedures  
 Government Procurement: General Conditions of Tender, Contract and Order  
 
21.8 Sanitation folder  
 
 Farm Dweller Sanitation: Guidelines for implementation  
 
 
21.9 Ground water folder  
 
 
 Ground water protocol  
 