The COVID-19 pandemic has had a huge impact across societies, with governments worldwide imposing restrictions of movement and other measures such as mandatory use of face coverings or quarantine to prevent the spread of the virus. As of 2nd October 2020, there have been 467,146 con- firmed cases of COVID-19 and 42,268 confirmed deaths in the UK.1 Hopes of returning to normality have been pinned on the availability of a COVID-19 vaccine, and vaccination is central to the UK government’s COVID-19 recovery strategy.2 Vaccine trials have reported encouraging results indicating that a COVID-19 vaccine is safe and produces a good immune response. However, the success of a vaccination program will depend on rates of uptake among the population. It is important to prepare and develop effective policies and messaging for vaccination now, in order to maximize uptake when a vaccine becomes available.
There is a wealth of literature investigating factors asso- ciated with vaccine uptake. Research is underpinned by multi- ple theories of health behavior, including the Health Belief
________________




Model,5 the Theory of Planned Behavior,6 and Protection Motivation Theory.7 Constructs outlined by these theories – including threat appraisal, coping appraisal, cues to action, self-efficacy, perceived benefits and barriers, subjective norms, perceived behavioral control, and attitudes, – have consistently been associated with uptake of routine vaccination8,9 as well as vaccine uptake during the H1N1 influenza pandemic.10 In addition to these theoretical con- structs, contextual factors are also known to influence vaccine uptake.8 Perceptions and attitudes are in part driven by these contextual factors, such as current events in the news and how the vaccine is being portrayed in the media. Since a coronavirus vaccine is not yet available, we measured intention to have the vaccination rather than uptake. Previous research around the seasonal influenza and H1N1 influenza vaccinations has demonstrated that vaccine beliefs and attitudes are related to vaccine intentions, which in turn were found to be a good predictor of uptake of those vaccinations.
To date, there have been two studies to our knowledge investigating factors associated with intention to be vaccinated






against COVID-19 in the UK in clinically vulnerable populations.13,14 One study found that increased intention to be vaccinated was associated with thinking that the COVID-19 outbreak would last for a long time, while decreased intention was associated with thinking that the risks of COVID-19 had been exaggerated by the media.13 These results should be interpreted cautiously as they did not account for the influence of participants’ sociodemographic characteristics. The second study investigated associations between vaccine intention and sociodemographic factors, finding that decreased intention was associated with younger age and Black and minority ethnicity, but did not investigate the influence of psychological factors on vaccination intention.14 Results from these studies should be interpreted with caution due to the protracted nature of data collection in both studies and the analyses used. However, they provide some initial insight into factors associated with COVID-19 vaccination intention. It is likely that a COVID- 19 vaccination will become available first to those in at-risk groups and those who have increased exposure to the virus through their job.15 However, vaccination intention in the general population should be investigated, as vaccination may be rolled out more widely soon afterward, and sufficient uptake will be critical to eliminating COVID-19. Furthermore, it remains a possibility that people who are not in at-risk groups and do not have increased exposure to the virus through their job may be able to be vaccinated for COVID-19 privately, much like the seasonal influenza vaccine, so understanding intentions across the whole population is important.
The aim of this study was to investigate associations between vaccination intention and theoretically grounded, contextual   and   sociodemographic   factors   in a demographically representative sample of the UK adult population.
We conducted a cross-sectional survey, between 14th and 17th July 2020. Participants completed the survey online, on Qualtrics.
Participants (n = 1,500) were recruited through Prolific’s online research panel and were eligible for the study if they were aged 18 years or over and lived in the UK (n = 38,000
+ eligible participants). Quota sampling was used, based on age, sex, and ethnicity, to ensure that the sample was broadly representative of the UK general population. Of 1,532 people who began the survey, 1,504 completed it (98% completion rate). Four participants were not included in the sample as they did not meet quality control checks. Participants were paid £2 for a completed survey.
Full survey materials are available online.16 Items were based on previous literature.17–21
________________
Personal and clinical characteristics
We asked participants to report their age, gender, ethnicity, religion, employment status, highest educational or profes- sional qualification, and total household income. We also asked participants what UK region they lived in, how many people lived in their household, whether they or someone else in their household (if applicable) had a chronic illness that made them clinically vulnerable to serious illness from COVID-19, and if they worked or volunteered in roles con- sidered critical to the COVID-19 response (‘key worker’ roles). Lastly, we asked participants if they had been vaccinated for seasonal influenza last winter (yes/no), and how likely they would be to have the seasonal influenza vaccine this winter (eleven
point scale, from “extremely unlikely” to “extremely likely”).
We asked participants to what extent they thought “corona- virus poses a risk to” people in the UK and to themselves personally, on a five-point scale, from “no risk at all” to “major risk.”
We asked participants if they thought they “have had, or currently have, coronavirus.” Participants could answer “I have definitely had it or definitely have it now,” “I have probably had it or probably have it now,” “I have probably not had it and probably don’t have it now,” and “I have definitely not had it and definitely don’t have it now.” We also asked participants if they personally knew anyone who had COVID-19 (yes/no).
Participants were asked a series of statements about COVID-19 (n = 8) and about a possible COVID-19 vaccina- tion (n = 24). For questions about the COVID-19 vaccination, participants were asked to imagine that a COVID-19 vaccine was widely available. Statements measured theoretical con- structs including perceived susceptibility to COVID-19, sever- ity of COVID-19, benefits of a COVID-19 vaccine, barriers to being vaccinated against COVID-19, ability to be vaccinated (self-efficacy), subjective norms, behavioral control, antici- pated regret, knowledge, trust in the Government and in the NHS. These items also investigated concerns about commercial profiteering, and participants’ beliefs about vaccination allow- ing life to get back to ‘normal’ and having to follow social distancing and other restrictions for COVID-19 if vaccinated. Participants rated perception statements on an eleven-point scale (0–10) from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree.” We also asked participants if their employer would want them to have the COVID-19 vaccination. Order of items was quasi- randomized.
To measure vaccination intention, we asked participants to state how likely they would be to have a COVID-19 vaccination “when a coronavirus vaccination becomes available to [them]” on an eleven-point scale from “extremely unlikely” (0) to “extremely likely” (10).


Ethical approval for this study was granted by Keele University’s Research Ethics Committee (reference: PS- 200129).
Due to the rapid nature of this research, the public was not involved in the development of the survey materials.
A target sample size of 1500 was chosen to provide a high ratio of cases to estimated parameters in order to avoid overfitting and loss of generalizability in the regression model.22
To identify variables associated with an intention to have the COVID-19 vaccination, we constructed a linear regression model. Ordinal and multinomial predictors were converted to dummy variables. To aid interpretation of the model, and to address collinearity in some variables, we ran principal component analyses on items investigating beliefs and atti- tudes about COVID-19 and a COVID-19 vaccination.
Variables entered into the model were selected a priori based on their theoretical relevance; no variable selection pro- cedures were employed. Five groups of variables were included in the model: personal and clinical characteristics; seasonal influenza vaccination; general beliefs and attitudes relating to vaccination; beliefs and attitudes relating to COVID-19 illness; and beliefs and attitudes relating to COVID-19 vaccination. The percentage of variance in the outcome variable explained by each predictor was calculated as the squared semi-partial correlation for a numerical predictor and the change in R2 attributable to a set of dummy variables.
As well as fitting the full model, we also added the groups of variables as successive blocks in a hierarchical model, to deter- mine the incremental increase in the adjusted R2 value as the groups of variables were added to the model.
Due to the large number of predictors in the model, statis- tical significance was set at p ≤ .01 to control Type 1 errors and 99% confidence intervals (CIs) were correspondingly calcu- lated for the regression coefficients. Assumptions of the analy- sis were checked. Analyses were conducted in SPSS 26.


As intended, participants were broadly representative of the UK population (mean age 46.0 years, SD = 15.8, range 18 to 87;
51% female; 85% white ethnicity; Table 1, see supplementary materials 1 for further breakdown).
Descriptive statistics for items assessing psychological fac- tors are reported in Tables 2 and 3. Participants perceived a greater risk of COVID-19 to others (73.4% reporting a significant or major risk of COVID-19 to people in the UK) than to themselves personally (35.6% significant or major risk). Endorsement of the item “we are all responsible for reducing the spread of coronavirus” was also high. Participants reported greater likelihood of having a coronavirus vaccination than a seasonal influenza vaccination. It is also noteworthy that participants reported considerably more trust in the NHS compared to the Government regarding managing the pandemic.
________________
Two components emerged from the principal component ana- lysis on beliefs and attitudes about COVID-19 (see supplemen- tary materials 2). The first component reflected items about perceived severity of COVID-19, perceived immunity to the virus, and impact of the pandemic on one’s life (“perceived threat and impact of COVID-19”). The second component measured trust in the NHS and the Government to manage the COVID-19 pandemic in the UK (“trust in COVID-19 management”).
When investigating items related to a COVID-19 vaccina- tion, four components emerged from this principal compo- nent analysis (see supplementary materials 2). The first component measured “general COVID-19 vaccination beliefs and attitudes,” with items loading onto this factor investigat- ing perceived vaccine effectiveness, social norms, likelihood of catching COVID-19 without a vaccine, beliefs about manda- tory vaccination, the influence of vaccine recommendations from different sources, anticipated regret of not being vacci- nated, and perceived ease of vaccination. The second compo- nent, termed “COVID-19 vaccination adverse effects” measured perception of adverse effects and novelty of the vaccine. The third component measured perceived informa- tion sufficiency to be able to make an informed decision about vaccination (“perceived knowledge sufficiency”). Items about vaccination allowing a return to ‘normal’ life and not having to follow social distancing and other restrictions if one were vaccinated loaded on to the fourth component (“return to ‘normal’ life”).


Participants’ vaccination intention is presented in Figure 1. Vaccination intention exhibited a marked negative skew (mean = 7.55, standard deviation = 2.92, median = 9). In order to categorize respondents in terms of their vaccination intention, we applied a priori cutpoints to the 0–10 scale (with scores of zero to two as “very unlikely,” three to seven as “uncertain” and eight to ten as “very likely”), 9.1% (95% CI 7.8%, 10.7%) reported being very unlikely to be vaccinated (n = 137), 26.9% (95% CI 24.7%, 29.2%) reported being uncer- tain about their likelihood of vaccination (n = 403), and 64.0% (95% CI 61.5%, 66.4%) reported being very likely to be vacci- nated (n = 960).
The final model explained 76% of the variance in intention to vaccinate (Table 4). Increased likelihood of being vaccinated for COVID-19 was significantly associated with older age, having been vaccinated for influenza last winter, perceiving a greater risk of COVID-19 to people in the UK, more positive general COVID-19 vaccination beliefs and attitudes, weaker beliefs that the vaccination would cause side effects or be unsafe, greater perceived information sufficiency to make an informed decision about COVID-19 vaccination, and lower endorsement of the notion that only people who are at risk of serious illness should be vaccinated for COVID-19. In terms of explained variance, the strongest predictors were the principal components representing general COVID-19 vaccination beliefs and attitudes (19.5% of variance explained), followed
________________
was added, it explained an additional 7% of the variance. Adding general vaccination beliefs and attitudes (block 3) resulted in the largest increase in proportion (34%) of explained variance (though in the full model the predictors in this group were no longer significant). When beliefs and atti- tudes about COVID-19 (block 4) were added to the model, they explained 4% more of the variance in vaccination intention. Adding positive beliefs and attitudes about a COVID-19 vaccination (block 5) explained a further 28% of the variance.
If COVID-19 vaccination were to be offered to the general population, one advantage might be the ability to achieve herd immunity. Information about herd immunity and vacci- nation estimates are rapidly changing. While some estimates indicate that up to 60% of the population might need to be vaccinated to achieve this,23 recent research suggests this per- centage could be considerably lower depending on variation in intending to be vaccinated for COVID-19 when a vaccine becomes available to them. While intention is a key driver of the uptake of health behaviors,6,7 vaccination intention is likely to be greater than actual vaccine uptake.26 Therefore, it is important to identify factors associated with vaccination intention early on, to support policy and communications when a vaccine becomes available. We found that, taken together, about COVID-19 and a COVID-19 vaccination explained 76% of the variance in vaccination intention.
Importantly, we found that the factor that explained the greatest proportion of the variance in vaccination intention (20%) was COVID-19 vaccination beliefs and attitudes. This factor encompassed items measuring positive influence of recommendations from authorities to be vaccinated, greater perceived social norms about vaccination, greater perceived effectiveness, greater perceived likelihood of catching COVID-19 without a vaccine, greater anticipated regret of not being vaccinated, beliefs that COVID-19 vaccination should be mandatory and greater perceived ease of vaccina- tion. These map on to theoretical constructs of threat apprai- sal, coping appraisal, subjective norms, and self-efficacy outlined by theories of uptake of health behaviors,5–7 which were also associated with uptake of vaccination during the H1N1 influenza pandemic.10 Earlier research investigating COVID-19 vaccine willingness in the UK found no associa- tion with perceived likelihood of catching COVID-19, trust in authorities, or clarity of information about the virus.13 However, those earlier results should be interpreted with caution as analyses did not control for personal or clinical characteristics and data were collected early in the pandemic. Our results suggest that people may hold general positive or negative beliefs and attitudes toward the vaccination and this general sense is driving vaccination intention at this point. While a COVID-19 vaccination has so far generally been positively framed in the media, as more information – and misinformation – about the vaccine comes to light, there is the potential for this general positive sentiment to be eroded, negatively influencing vaccination intention and uptake. Since  our  survey  was  conducted,  the  UK  trial  of a coronavirus vaccine by the University of Oxford and AstraZeneca was halted for a week in September 2020
________________






following the adverse reaction of a patient.27 It is unclear what impact, if any, this might have on vaccination intentions and how long any impact might last. Regular and longitudinal assessments such as the one we report here can help clarify such impacts.
Details around COVID-19 vaccination remain uncertain until a vaccine has been developed, but will become clearer as more information is available regarding vaccine composition (immunogenicity and safety), and immunity after having con- tracted COVID-19.15 We found that vaccination intention was associated with greater perceived information sufficiency about COVID-19 and a COVID-19 vaccination. In the case of COVID-19, a perception of sufficient information about the vaccination is interesting as there is currently little such information available. What information there is comes from results of vaccine trials that were still underway at the time of data collection. These results may therefore reflect participants’ general vaccine beliefs and attitudes.
In contrast to previous research,10 we found no evidence of an association between greater perceived risk of COVID-19 to oneself and vaccination intention. However, greater perceived risk to others was associated with vaccination intention in our study. This suggests that vaccination campaigns and messaging highlighting the need for vaccination for altruistic reasons (i.e. to protect others) might be particularly effective. We also found that concerns about adverse effects and vaccine novelty were associated with vaccination intention. As novel threats are perceived as inherently more risky,28 and perceiving adverse effects is consistently associated with vaccination refusal,9,10 this is unsurprising.
Eligibility criteria for a COVID-19 vaccination are not yet clear. Initial guidance from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunization suggests that vaccination should be prioritized among frontline health and social care




workers and those at increased risk of critical illness or death from COVID-19.15 We found no evidence of an association between clinical vulnerability to COVID-19 and vaccination intention. However, vaccination intention was lower in those who thought that only those who are at risk of serious illness need to be vaccinated. This may be because most of the sample did not think that they were at increased clinical risk of COVID-19. Our finding that thinking that one has had COVID-19 was not associated with vaccination intention is reassuring.
With some evidence suggesting that repeated vaccination for COVID-19 may be necessary,23 parallels with seasonal influenza vaccination can be drawn and lessons learned to promote vaccination uptake. Populations at greater clinical risk of serious illness from COVID-19 are also similar to those at risk of serious illness from influenza, and target populations for vaccines are likely to be similar. We found that seasonal influenza vaccination was strongly associated with COVID-19 vaccination intention. Taken together, these factors may suggest that in future years, co-administration of the seasonal influenza and COVID-19 vaccines could be con- sidered. In the meantime, with the 2020/21 influenza season fast approaching in the UK at the time of writing, and an increasing strain that concurrent circulation of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 will put on healthcare services,29 it is crucial that uptake of the seasonal influenza vaccine increases
________________
compared to uptake in 2019/20 (England: 72% in 65+ year olds, 45% in a clinical risk category; 44% in pregnant women; and 44% in pre-school children and 60% in school-aged children30).
Given the prominence of COVID-19 in the media, contextual factors are likely to be strongly influential in vaccination uptake,8 with vaccine sentiments likely reflecting the media discourse. However, there was no evidence for an association between beliefs about a return to ‘normal’ and COVID-19 vaccination intention using our stringent criteria for statistical significance (p ≤ .01). This may be due to the continuing uncertainties surrounding a COVID-19 vaccination. Given the potential for sensationalized stories to increase perceptions of the likelihood and severity of adverse effects, decrease vaccine uptake, and in some cases lead to political responses including the suspension of vaccination programs,31 it is important that when more information about a vaccine becomes available, a clear factual account is portrayed in the media. It remains to be seen how this might be implemented in practice.
In line with other research conducted on COVID-19 vac- cine willingness in the UK,14 we found that older age was associated with greater intention to be vaccinated. This finding may reflect the related increased uptake of seasonal influenza vaccination in older age groups. It may also reflect the well- publicized increased risk of COVID-19-associated morbidity and mortality.32






This study has limitations. First, although we used a demographically representative sample of the UK popula- tion, we cannot be sure how representative survey respon- dents are of the views and behaviors of the general population.33,34 However, we assume that the associations between variables follow the same pattern as those in the general population.35 Second, we cannot infer causality due to the cross-sectional nature of the study. Third, we inves- tigated vaccination intention. Actual vaccination uptake is likely to be lower.26 Given the theoretical importance of intention in theories of uptake of health behaviors,6,7 it is likely that factors associated with vaccination intention in
________________
this study will also influence vaccination uptake. Fourth, due to unclear evidence of the role of children in transmis- sion of COVID-19 in the UK15 and space constraints in the survey, we chose not to investigate intention to vaccinate one’s child for COVID-19. Future research could usefully consider the impact of any details that emerge about a COVID-19 vaccine, such as how effective the vaccine is and how long immunity conferred by the vaccine lasts. It would also be useful to conduct age-stratified research to further understand how beliefs such as personal risk per- ception might vary and interact with intention to get vac- cinated by age.


High levels of uptake of a COVID-19 vaccination when one becomes available will be necessary in order for the UK gov- ernment’s COVID-19 recovery strategy to be fulfilled. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first methodologically rigor- ous study investigating the intention to receive a COVID-19 vaccination in a demographically representative sample of the UK population. While there is still much uncertainty sur- rounding COVID-19 and vaccination, results from this study provide useful insights that can help guide policy and commu- nications when a vaccine becomes available. The UK popula- tion is still divided in their intention to be vaccinated for COVID-19. Approximately two-thirds report being likely to be vaccinated when a vaccine becomes available to them despite the dearth of information about a COVID-19 vaccina- tion. As vaccine uptake is likely to be lower than vaccination intention, it is worrying that the remaining third were unsure or did not intend to be vaccinated for COVID-19, given the impact of COVID-19 on day-to-day life and prominence of the virus in the media. These findings are likely to reflect general vaccine attitudes and beliefs and clear information about the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine may be needed to increase vaccination intentions. Our results indicate that vaccination campaigns and communications should draw on the- oretical constructs. Contextual factors, such as the media discourse around a COVID-19 vaccination, are likely to influence beliefs and attitudes toward the vaccine. Communications should also explain and highlight how vaccination can stop the spread of COVID-19 to others and facilitate a return to normality.




________________